<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2>

<p>FELISE drove rapidly out of the 
town, and as she passed glanced 
carelessly once more at the brilliant 
flowers in the bow-window. </p>

<p>"Ah, she knows I live here — she is triumph- 
ing over me!" said Rosa to herself, writhing, 
the cruel fangs of jealousy striking deeply 
into her. Rosa went to the mirror, looked 
at herself, and turned away trembling. The 
truth went home to her like a thrust from a 
poniard — she had but prettiness, her rival
was beautiful. It was a beauty with which 
competition was impossible. </p>

<p>Till now the poor girl had held on to a 
secret hope; in time, long time, still perhaps 
in time, some remembrance of the face he 
once praised, some memory of the features 
which had once delighted him might move 
Martial, might bring him repentant to her 
side. </p>

<p>He had tired of her face; well, in time he 
might tire of another's face. After all, the 
other was only a woman like herself. </p>

<p>This woman was not like herself. </p>

<p>Rosa recognised it in a moment. A woman 
can see a woman so clearly — faults, excel- 
lences, details, all are so clear to her. Rosa 
recognised the loveliness of the face, the 
nobleness of the proportioned head, the form, 
the very way she sat in the plain, old- 
fashioned pony-carriage was sufficient. This 
woman was not like herself. This was a 
woman with whom she could never enter 
into competition. </p>

<p>Martial was gone from her for ever. No 
use any more to cultivate these poor flowers, 
to watch him passing once now and then; all 
was over. </p>

<p>The bitter tears flowed, and were not 
checked; the brave woman who had borne 
up against all else broke down utterly now. </p>

<p>She could not have put it into words, but 
she felt that she was fighting against some- 
thing stronger than human beings — against 
an influence — a power which directed circum- 
stances against her. It was not her own 
fault, not even her lack of singular and ex- 
ceptional loveliness, not Martial's fickleness; 
it was the irresistible Event which decides 
life. For all might have been — all would 
have been well had not Felise existed. </p>

<p>The fact of Felise's existence — her birth, 
her life, her breathing existence at that 
moment — was the cruel fact that sternly shut 
her out from happiness. Nothing that Felise 
had done — no act of hers — simply because 
she was; that was enough. </p>


<p>Rosa was weeping the iron tyranny of the 
universe — of the laws of life which decree 
pain and unhappiness for no cause whatso- 
ever upon those whom chance selects. </p>

<p>Rosa had done no wrong — why should she 
suffer? There never lived a better woman ; 
yet she was punished and tortured to the 
very heart's core. </p>

<p>Human dramatists arrange for all their 
characters to find happiness in the end. If 
there be any difficulty some one transfers 
his or her love with the greatest facility to 
another person; and thus being all paired 
off, they dance down the stage to the tune of 
" Sir Roger de Coverley." </p>

<p>The drama of real life never ends like this. 
Some one has to suffer — always some one 
has to suffer. </p>

<p>The old Greeks dwelt on the tendency of 
human affairs to drift downwards irresistibly 
to unhappiness. Guilt — that is, untoward 
and often involuntary actions — pulls genera- 
tion after generation heavily as lead down, </p>

<p>down, down. Sophocles, ^schylus — take 
which you will, still the same thought 
pervades their sculptured groups (for they 
are sculptured in words, nude, noble, un- 
happy). Grief falls upon human beings as 
the rain, not selecting good or evil, visiting 
the innocent, condemning those v^^ho have 
done no wrong. </p>

<p>Rosa, presently becoming calmer, began 
to reflect, and thought how admirably this 
beautiful woman would fit in with those 
poetical fancies of Martial. She had listened 
to him unmoved; she knew she did not care 
for these delicate sentiments — these dreams 
of the imagination. If only she could have 
taken an interest in them, perhaps this might 
have been averted. Martial doubtless had 
at last found that she was not the ideal 
goddess of his fancy. </p>

<p>But this woman — this Felise, with her 
features, her beautiful head, her form — this 
was the ideal Martial imagined. To her he 
would joyfully transfer his poetical reveries; </p>

<p>and to her, Rosa owned bitterly to herself — 
to her they were fitted. </p>

<p>Another mood, and now losing touch of 
the deep chords of life which dignified her 
sorrow, Rosa fell to the level of a mere 
woman. Martial had not been taken from 
her by fair means — he had been inveigled, 
trapped with golden hair, with sweet, false 
smiles, warm hints of unutterable love. 
Shameless coquetry — she could see it all — 
bold advances. How should a man dis- 
tinguish the false from the true? </p>

<p>A man was so easily beguiled — a man 
could not see a woman as a woman saw her. 
These trickeries and soft enchantments — so 
bold and obvious to a woman — to a man 
were real. It was a shame. She was in- 
dignant he should have been so deceived. 
For doubtless with this creature's singular 
outward loveliness there went a correspond- 
ing degree of evil fascination. </p>

<p>Rosa hated her as a jealous woman only 
can hate. Felise's meanness was even worse
than her shamelessness. Rosa easily learned 
from the merchant that Goring was by no 
means well-to-do; this penniless wretch, then, 
was in reality aiming at Martial's house and 
home far more than at him. It was simply 
disgusting. Rosa felt righteous in her own 
ample dower. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>

<p>ELISE was not long reaching home, 
and Abner came to take charge of 
the pony. She asked him to meet 
her that evening at seven o'clock at Mr. 
Godwin's, just outside in the path, and not 
to mention to anyone that he was going there. 
The good-natured, loyal fellow promised to 
do so; it was indeed a pleasure to him to do 
anything for her. </p>

<p>Upstairs in her room Felise printed a few 
words with pen and ink on a slip of note- 
paper, so that the writer could not be guessed 
from the handwriting; and then waited till 
seven, which hour she had chosen because 
Abner would have finished his work. </p>

<p>He was waiting for her just outside God- 
win's premises, ready to do her bidding, let it 
be what it might. </p>

<p>"Here is the money," said FeHse, handing 
a bag heavy with gold to Robert Godwin in 
the little side parlour to which he had con- 
ducted her. </p>

<p>They were alone. Robert counted it 
methodically, and began to write a receipt. </p>

<p>"Do not put my name in the receipt," 
said Felise, a sudden thought occurring to 
her. </p>

<p>Robert did as he was bid, and omitted the 
name. The receipt simply ran, 'Received £'jo 
for the bay horse, Ruy. — Robert Godwin." </p>

<p>"Now give me the horse," said she, taking 
up the paper. </p>

<p>"To-night } I will have him groomed 
and sent over ' </p>

<p>"No, no — now. Come," rising and going 
to the door. </p>

<p>Robert could not refuse. He w^alked as 
slowly as he could, wishing to make her stay
as long as possible, for she came and went 
like the wind. Felise with her own hand 
took Ruy's halter — he was nothing loth to 
come with her, remembering the apples — and 
led him towards the gate. </p>

<p>"But you will permit me to help you; let 
me go with you ' </p>

<p>"There is no need; I have Abner waiting 
outside." </p>

<p>Robert Godwin's face at the name became 
black as night; he said not another word, 
but merely accompanied her to the gate, and 
raised his hat in silence. </p>

<p>Felise did not relinquish her hold of the 
halter, though Abner immediately joined her, 
till a turn of the lane hid them from Robert 
Godwin's view. </p>

<p>'Abner," said Felise, stopping, *I think — I 
believe you would be true to me." </p>

<p>"That indeed I would, miss!" His blue 
eyes lit up, and his countenance grew for the 
moment handsome with earnestness. </p>

<p>"I want you to do something for me, and
not to tell a single person — not one, mind — 
not even your sweetheart." </p>

<p>Abner crrew red — Fclise did not know 
whether he had or had not a sweetheart. 
His face looked guilty. </p>

<p>* I won't tell nobody — not a word, miss; 
bless you, you may be sure of I." </p>

<p>"I believe I may." She took the receipt 
for Ruy, and doubled it up inside the slip of 
paper with the printed message in the form 
of a note, and gave it to Abner. </p>

<p>"I want you to take this horse over to 
the Manor House, and leave him in Mr. 
Barnard's stables; and then go up to the 
house and see him — wait till you do see him 
— and give him the note, and come away 
without a word. Don't answer a single 
question; if he asks any, if anyone asks any 
— say — let me see — say — say, another man 
gave you sixpence to bring the horse because 
he was tired. On the road you met him, you 
know, by chance, and so you don't know any- 
thing." </p>

<p>"All right, miss; I'll tell 'em a tale — never 
fear." </p>

<p>"And then I shall want to know if you 
have done it; but I don't want you to call at 
our house — ah! what is that tune you are 
always whistling?" </p>

<p>""Jump into the waggon"?" </p>

<p>'Yes, "Phyllis dear"— that's it. Now, 
when you come back, stop outside our gate 
and whistle it as hard as you can, and I shall 
understand." </p>

<p>"So I will." </p>

<p>* I shall have two shillings on Saturday, 
and you shall have them." </p>

<p>"No, miss; if you please, I don't want no 
money — you have a-been terrable good to 
our folk." </p>

<p>* But you shall have the two shillings." </p>

<p>"Bless you, miss, sixpence will be a-plenty 
for such a little job as this here!" </p>

<p>'Well, well! wait till Saturday," said Felise, 
determined he should have the two shillings
all the same. ' Now, you're sure you quite 
understand?" </p>

<p>"I understands; all right, miss ; I shall do it 
famous." He touched his cap and started. </p>

<p>Felise watched him and Ruy till they 
turned the corner, and then returned home. 
She found Mr. Goring in some anxiety about 
Mary Shaw, who had had a fainting-fit and 
was lying on the sofa. Felise ran to her side 
and found poor Mary, usually red as a peony, 
as white as a sheet; she had fainted all at 
once as she was running in from the garden, 
hearing Mr. Goring call. </p>

<p>* And you fell upstairs yesterday." </p>

<p>* That's lucky," said Mary, with a faint 
smile. </p>

<p>"And you're always complaining of a pain 
in your side." </p>

<p>* It's nothing — it's the heat — and I ate too 
many cherries." </p>

<p>"Well, if it happens again you must see 
the doctor." </p>



<p>At which terrible word Mary burst into 
tears. </p>

<p>"Oh, don't you let I see the doctor — now 
don't you! I should die of fright, I knows I 
should; you don't mean that now — do you, 
now? Say as you don't mean it. I can't 
abear no doctors." </p>

<p>To pacify her, for she was trembling all 
over, Felise promised that the doctor should 
not be called in unless it was a very bad case 
indeed. </p>

<p>Quite suddenly Mary sat up, and declared 
she felt as well as ever; and certainly her 
colour began to return, and she laughed at 
her tumbling down. </p>

<p>"I fell — whop! like a sack out of window 
— like them sacks the miller pitches out of 
his window into a cart." </p>

<p>In ten minutes she was humming merrily 
as she went about the house. But these little 
incidents made Felise fear that the girl — to 
whom she was much attached — had over- 
grown herself, and that in spite of her stout- </p>

<p>ness and rosiness she was not really very- 
strong. She was remarkably timid, but all 
cottage folk (and indeed most country people) 
dislike the idea of a doctor because they 
seldom resort to one except in serious illness, 
and the doctor is associated with great 
troubles. </p>

<p>After awhile Abner reflected that the 
horse might as well carry him, and by the 
help of a gate got on Ruy's back, and so 
arrived very pleasantly at the Manor House. 
There was but one labourer about, who 
showed him the stable, and whose questions 
he easily parried. He had, however, to wait 
some time for Martial, and spoke to him at 
last at the porch; Martial, who was not in a 
good-humour, thrust the note in his pocket 
on hearing no answer was expected, and 
thought no more about it, supposing it to be 
some trifling business. Some hours conse- 
quently elapsed before he opened it; he 
remembered it just as he was about to 
retire. </p>



<p>The note contained the printed message: 
' One who thinks of you returns you your 
favourite," and the receipt for Ruy, £70, 
signed Robert Godwin. </p>

<p>Martial rushed to the stable, and there 
found his favourite comfortably munching in 
his old stall. His surprise and delight were 
about equal. He stayed with Ruy a long 
time, wondering who it could have been who 
had made him this magnificent present. 
Young as he was, it was years now since he 
had received the least kindness from anyone; 
the mercenary manner in which the old mer- 
chant had broken off the engagement with 
Rosa on finding out his poverty was not 
calculated to increase his faith in the 
generosity of the world generally. </p>

<p>The note itself gave him no clue; the 
letters might have been printed by a man or 
woman — indeed, by a child; the watermark, 
as he held the strip up to the lantern, was 
partly visible, but the same watermark is 
impressed on tons of paper. From the
labourer who had received the horse not the 
slightest information could be obtained, and 
the messenger who had brought him had dis- 
appeared hours ago. It was dark when the 
man gave him the note, and he would not 
know him again; indeed, he had taken no 
notice of him whatever. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin could tell him, no doubt; 
but Martial instantly decided that Robert 
Godwin would shut his lips and absolutely 
refuse. He knew the man too well. It 
could only have been — it must have been 
one or other of those wealthy London friends 
who had petted him in boyhood, and deserted 
him when of an age to appreciate assistance. 
They had not then forgotten him. </p>

<p>With this conclusion Martial returned to 
bed, but woke up in the night with the 
sudden thought that it was Rosa. She had 
plenty of money; she knew how fond he was 
of Ruy; she had bought him back. He 
jumped up and partly dressed; he was so 
annoyed at the thought that he was ready to
return Ruy that very night to Godwin. It 
would look rather absurd riding over to 
Godwin's at three in the morning, so he 
decided to wait till breakfast. By breakfast- 
time, after a look at Ruy and at the downs 
they had so often breasted together, his 
attachment for the horse conquered his 
pride; he could not send him away. </p>

<p>His cousins had of course heard of the 
mysterious return of Ruy, and plied him with 
questions. Martial did not show them the 
note, but could not conceal the facts. * It 
was Rosa, of course," they said. ' What a 
dear good girl she is, and what a time it is 
since we have seen her! We must go and 
call on her." </p>

<p>Martial left the room in anger. He saddled 
Ruy; yet even the freshness and beauty of 
the morning, and the pleasure of riding his 
favourite once more, could not overcome the 
bitterness of the thought that he owed that 
delight to Rosa. So entirely had his nature 
turned against the woman he once adored. </p>

<p>"Wait for the Waggon ' echoed in the still- 
ness of the night round the gables of Beech- 
knoll — the jolly old tune, mellow and loud. 
Three times Abner whistled it, and Felise, 
listening in her chamber, knew that Martial 
had received the horse. Some one else 
heard the tune too; a window was gently 
opened, and a low voice called: </p>

<p>'Good-night, Ab." </p>

<p>"Night, you," said Abner, stumping on 
down the road. </p>


<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2>

<p>I HE miller of Glads Mill was a 
happy man. How many times in 
her girlhood had the little Felise, 
wandering round the hamlet, stayed to listen 
to the rumble of the great wheel, and to 
glance furtively at the whitened half-length 
of the miller leaning on the hatch! So few 
doors now are constructed in this manner 
that, for the miller's attitude to be un- 
derstood, it is almost necessary to explain 
that a hatch is a door which shuts in two 
pieces. The upper half may be left open to 
admit air, while the lower half is closed; and 
it was upon the top of this lower half that 
the miller leant his arms and razed stead- </p>

<p>fastly outwards. This attitude has been the 
chosen one of millers for many genera- 
tions. </p>

<p>Luke Bond, the miller of Glads Mill, was 
seldom seen in any other position. He was 
there most of the day, and far into the 
evening, rarely going down into the hamlet. 
Stout, short, red-headed, and broad of face, 
his arms, shoulders, and big head filled the 
upper half of the doorway. </p>

<p>Innumerable wooden witticisms were 
showered on him by the hamlet youth; he 
was compared to the moon rising in a fog; 
sometimes they shouted ' Sunset ' at him; 
they alleged that of a dark evening they 
came up there to see their watches by the 
liofht of his red head. Old Bond never took 
the least heed; he continued to rise, and set, 
and shine in the doorw^ay more steadfast than 
all the other luminaries. </p>

<p>The little Felise looked at him furtively, 
almost afraid; then, as a dog passed by the 
door and he did not hurt it, by degrees she
eathered courage and ventured to stand by 
the great water-wheel. </p>

<p>Driven by the pent-up force of water in 
the deep black pool above, the moss-grown, 
dripping wheel rolled round and round, the 
ground trembled under her feet, and the 
spray and splash beneath foamed white at 
the foot of the circle. </p>

<p>Forth from a narrow window, like an 
arrow-slit in the dark wall above the wheel, 
there drifted out an impalpable dust of 
flour, which settled on the grass and ivy 
and blue veronica flowers, and on Felise's 
jacket. The hard nether millstone ground 
small and relentlessly, and the white powder 
of the crushed wheat floated out into the 
air. </p>

<p>She would stand there for half an hour at 
a time, watching the green wheel rolling on 
itself, listening to the musical rhythm of the 
hopper beating time to the heavy rumble 
and the splash. Old Bond's eye never moved 
from her. </p>

<p>Sometimes she went round up the steps to 
the edge of the black pool in the rickyard, 
and gazed down into the dark water. If she 
stayed there too long old Bond used to come 
up after her and say, ' Now, miss, your uncle 
will be a-wanting of you." He did not like 
her to look earnestly down into the pool. 
There is an old country superstition that if 
you gaze too long and too intently at water, 
ultimately it will draw you into it. Old Bond 
would not let her stay there long. Felise 
made no resistance, but went away whenever 
he wished. </p>

<p>Once when she came she had three red 
roses in her hand; and, after looking awhile 
at the green wheel, presently she went quickly 
up to old Bond, and put the three roses into 
his hand. Before he could open his slow 
mouth to speak she was gone. The plough- 
boys used to say that if you wanted Luke to 
look at anything you must get some one with 
a lever to turn his head for him, as sailors 
turn a capstan. </p>



<p>Bond never forgot the three red roses. 
' She be a lady, she be," he said. </p>

<p>He had drilled his under-worker into 
wheel-like regularity. The fellow had no 
volition; he minded the millstones, and the 
hopper, and the bins as if he had been a 
pear-tree cog himself in the machinery of the 
mill, while Bond shone at the doorway the 
day through. </p>

<p>But in the evenings of summer this happy 
man shot rats, hiding himself behind a low 
rick of stubble near the black pool in the 
rickyard, so as to fire down upon them as 
they scampered across to his pigsties — these 
were land-rats, ordinary rascals — or thinning 
out the brown water-rats as they swam in 
the brooklet below the mill. Sitting on a 
log Bond waited so quiet, so patient, so still, 
that in the end the rats were no match for 
him. The most patient creature in the world 
is the toad, which will squat a whole day till 
he catches his fly. Bond was not one whit 
behind the toad. </p>

<p>Every beast of the wood, or the hedge, or 
the burrow, over and above the beasts of the 
chase and of the warren, according to the 
ancient writers, is to be called ' rascal." Bond 
applied that term freely both to land and 
water rats, for the first took his barley-meal, 
and the second was for ever drilling holes in 
the banks of the stream and wasting the 
water. He watched for them with the 
patience of relentless hatred. Ofttimes he 
sat there through the long stilly evenings of 
summer, till the solitary candle of the mill 
was lit and shone feebly forth upon the 
green wheel under him, casting vast, un- 
certain, and moving shadows on the wall and 
dam. </p>

<p>Thus the miller of Glads Mill was a happy 
man, for he possessed an inexhaustible fund 
of stolidity. No nervousness and haste, no 
rushing to and fro, no worry and wear and 
tear; nor any aspiration deep and high after 
the beautiful or the true. No longing for 
any man's applause; no sigh for the light in
any woman's eye. He was complete in him- 
self, like a tree. </p>

<p>If a man could select his fate, what better 
could he choose than this? </p>

<p>To be in strong, good health; to have 
plenty of simple food and a never-failing ap- 
petite; to sleep like the wall of the mill ; to 
feel no anxiety for wife or children; to labour 
for no ever-receding ideal of fortune or art; 
above all, to be content. </p>

<p>See the thin fallen cheek of the man who 
labours with thought; see the brow from 
which the hair wears at the temples; see the 
dark rims beneath the eyelids; the stoop, the 
ever-increasing ailments that undermine the 
constitution. Compare these with the oak- 
like health of the stolid miller. </p>

<p>Beauty — what is beauty, forsooth? Form 
and colour; that is, surface only. Fortune — 
what is fortune } Nothing is ever a pleasure 
or a real profit to him who has to labour 
for it. Truth — you die in the pursuit, and
the sea beats the beach as It did a thousand 
years ago. </p>

<p>The stolid are alone happy. Yet there 
drops from the azure heaven a beam of light, 
and whomsoever that ray touches must follow 
it to the end, though cheeks grow pale, 
though shoulders stoop, though ache and 
pain increase. The path of the gods 
pursues beauty, but the stolid are alone 
happy. </p>

<p>The miller existed, and in his existence — 
in all the years the heavy wheel had rolled 
round, till now that streaks of grey appeared 
in his hair — he had never known but one 
moment when a flash from the world of 
romance lit up the neutral tones of his life. 
This was when Felise put the three red 
roses in his hand. These were the only 
flowers planted in his path, but these had 
never faded. </p>

<p>He never forgot the gift. Clad in im- 
movable content, nothing could rouse any
latent aspiration in his heart; but still he 
dwelt much upon these roses in his quiet 
mind, wondered about them, puzzled over 
the memory of them, tried to understand 
what they meant. There are some flowers 
that never die. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>

<p>IHE miller did not shoot the rascal 
rats on Sundays; but habit led 
him one Sunday evening to take 
his place on the log by the stubble-rick. It 
was thus he became conscious that some 
other creatures besides rats were about, and 
stealthily shifting himself along the log till 
he could see round into the rickyard — be- 
tween the rick and an elder-bush — he watched 
them without difficulty. </p>

<p>Mary Shaw and Abncr Brown had made 
this retired spot their trysting-place. As a 
rule, people in the dusk of the evening rather 
avoided the neighbourhood of the deep and 
dangerous mill-pool. This suited them very
nicely, and here they spent an hour or so on 
Sunday evenings in amorous converse. </p>

<p>Miller Bond did not interfere or spoil the 
game; in a rude sort of way he rather liked 
to see it, never having had experience in this 
line. Nor did he spy on them at all in the 
spy's spirit; he looked occasionally, grinned, 
and said nothing to anyone. </p>

<p>There was scarce another man in his con- 
dition in the hamlet who would have been 
as kindly as this. Had anyone else dis- 
covered the lovers, there would have been 
some horse-play, some trick or other played 
upon them. The discreditable knaves who 
loiter about hamlets on Sundays, often make 
it their especial business to watch those who 
go off in couples, to track them secretly, and 
presently annoy them. It is difficult to 
imagine a practice more low. </p>

<p>Miller Bond chuckled and said nothing. 
He chuckled first at the loving passages, and 
secondly because Polly Shaw had rather the 
character of a prude — not a common character
in hamlets. Prude is not exactly the word; 
she was not a coquette then, and she bore a 
stainless reputation. </p>

<p>You might on a Sunday see Mary coming 
down the road, dressed in her best (and she 
dressed very well, having caught the idea of 
it from Felise), with her parasol in her hand, 
swinging it like a walking-stick, so that the 
tip just touched the grass at the side, tossing 
her proud little head disdainfully as the 
hamlet lads made loud remarks on her 
personal appearance. </p>

<p>A very pretty, plump, merry little girl she 
looked; the pink of neatness, with her laugh- 
ing eyes and rosy cheeks, her hair so cleverly 
arranged, and a silver brooch — real silver 
(Felise's present) — at her neck, and an air as 
much as to say, * I'm Mary Shaw; you may 
laugh, and I will laugh with you, but none of 
your coarse jests for me. Hands off!" </p>

<p>It had always been ' hands off" with pretty 
Polly Shaw. </p>

<p>A hamlet girl of the cottage order has a
rude ordeal to go through as she enters her 
teens, and few of them succeed in preserving 
their modesty, not to mention their reputation. </p>

<p>One harvest, not long before Mary entered 
service at Mr. Goring's, she was tying up 
sheaves in the wheatfield, and happened to be 
quite alone. By-and-by Mr. Robert Godwin 
walked up, and without any preamble or pre- 
liminary courting made her a dishonourable 
proposal, at the same time holding out his 
hand on which glittered a silver sixpence. 
Always the miser. </p>

<p>Polly snatched up a reaping-hook that was 
lying near and cut at him; it was only by 
jumping aside that he escaped a fearful gash. 
He swore at and threatened her with the law 
for assault, but of course nothing came of it. 
He never spoke to her again, but he did not 
forget or forgive. </p>

<p>A rejected lover has the quickest of eyes, 
second only to those of a jealous woman; 
and long afterwards Robert Godwin was the 
only one who suspected Mary Shaw and
Abner Brown. From that hour he deter- 
mined the old couple should be turned out, In 
order to injure Mary's prospects as much as 
possible. He knew there was no other 
cottage available for them in the hamlet: 
they could be married and q;o home there; 
but if that was shut to them, their future was 
gloomy and uncertain. </p>

<p>Shaw's mother, when the girl told her of 
the incident in the wheatfield, severely re- 
buked her for being such a fool, and missing 
such a chance. Measter Godwin had heaps 
of money; she might never catch such a one 
as he again. </p>

<p>The mother, in fact, would gladly have 
sold her daughter. All she expressed indig- 
nation about was the sixpence. </p>

<p>These morals are born of generations of 
cruel poverty, and they are perpetuated by 
the brutal modern system which leaves for 
the worn-out labourer or labourer's wife no 
refuofe but the workhouse or the frravc. 
Workhouse and grave lower in the distance
all their lives, as a cloud lowers on the horizon. 
They snatch, therefore, at any means of 
present enjoyment — drink, or worse; why 
not? They have no hereafter on earth ; 
no age of ease and comfort. * Hang it, let's 
take what us can!" is their maxim. </p>

<p>Some will say, I suppose, that I am paint- 
ing Robert Godwin in too black colours, and 
that to be true to nature he ought to have 
one redeeming trait. </p>

<p>This is one of the special cants of the 
nineteenth century. A drunken blackguard 
navvy or low seaman stabs his woman, then 
he besfs for a lock of her hair. An extra- 
ordinary brute — extraordinary even among a 
collection of brutes — the other day took up a 
heavy hammer and smashed his own children 
on their mother's breast; but as some redeem- 
ing trait— some redeeming cant — was found 
in his character, he was reprieved from the 
gallows. A bank secretary steals thousands 
of pounds which people had deposited for 
safety; when he is in prison he begs that they
will not confiscate his sister's property. I 
fail to see anything redeeming in it; it seems 
to me the most infernal humbucr. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had no such redeeming 
trait, and to my idea that was the best thing 
about him — he was no hypocrite. He was 
absolutely without any redeeming trait. </p>

<p>He was simply true to his nature. Nor 
was there anything exceptionally bad in his 
proffer to Mary Shaw; it in no degree 
stamped him as unusually evil; it was only 
what others do. Of course that makes it no 
better; still this is the real state of things. 
Such proffers are made every day of the year 
by the dozen to such poor girls, both by the 
rich and by those in their own rank of life. 
Mary herself had had five or six from various 
individuals. If you had explained to Robert 
Godwin that he had done a very wicked 
thing he would have been unfeignedly sur- 
prised, for he had never seen it in that light. </p>

<p>Mary was really a good girl, incapable of 
baseness. She was not to be bought or
tempted; but she loved with all her heart, 
and she had a very warm, generous, affec- 
tionate heart. Big, broad-chested, loyal 
Abner and pretty Polly Shaw made in 
every way a desirable couple. </p>

<p>He was always in the garden, Polly was 
always running in and out; it was no wonder 
the flame was communicated to the tinder. 
Mr. Goring, full of his trees and his philo- 
sophies, never noticed it. Felise, dreaming 
of Martial, never noticed it; but the colour- 
less eye of Robert Godwin — the rejected — 
saw it, and hated Abner. </p>

<p>After a time Miller Bond made another 
discovery while engaged with these rascal 
rats, and this was that a second individual 
occasionally met Mary Shaw in the rickyard 
by the mill-pool. Mary was frequently sent 
down into the hamlet; she had always the 
excuse of calling for a minute on her mother 
if she wished to run out after work was over, 
and Felise never said no. So she had 
plenty of opportunities. </p>

<p>Who this second m;in was, Bond did not 
know; he had so long been isolated at the 
mill that he knew scarcely any except those 
who lived in the hamlet, or sent their corn 
to be ground. It was a gentleman evidently 
—a gentleman who whispered with Mary 
Shaw for a few minutes, and gave her silver 
money, and sometimes stole a kiss, Mary 
not making much resistance. Why should 
she? What's in a kiss unseen ? — a Ljentle- 
man, too. </p>

<p>Miller Bond said nothing, but was careful 
how he fired at the rats not to disturb this 
pretty little comedy in the rickyard. </p>

<p>It was Martial Barnard who met Mary 
Shaw in the rickyard, and his object was to 
learn beforehand the best opportunities of 
studying the Picture. </p>

<p>Martial had found it difficult to study the 
Picture because of Felise's uncertain move- 
ments, so that he seldom knew where or 
when to waylay her. By making friends 
with Felise's maid — not a difficult task to a
handsome young gentleman free with his 
silver — he managed to discover what Felise 
was likely to do, and where she would pro- 
bably walk on the following day; information 
which Mary extracted by sly questions from 
her unsuspecting mistress. </p>

<p>Mary was only too delighted to play her 
part in helping Felise to a lover. In her 
opinion so beautiful a young lady, and so 
kind and nice and unaffected, ought to have 
had several long before now. She was really 
happy in the idea that she was furthering her 
dear mistress's interest, for of course she put 
down Martial as a lover; she could not have 
understood the fine divisions which Martial 
had drawn in his mind. </p>

<p>She only wondered why Martial, who was 
not at all shy with her, did not follow up his 
lady boldly and openly; that was her idea of 
making love, following up, and it was not a 
bad one. </p>

<p>Mary, however, was shrewd enough not 
to tell Martial of Felise's morning visits to
Robert Godwin's, thinking that she might 
cause mischief; for Mary, who had hitherto 
believed her mistress heart-whole, could not 
at all understand these visits. Felise quite 
threw out her calculations by suddenly going 
into Maasbury (to the silversmith's), and the 
result was that on that day Martial missed 
seeino- the Picture, which was the cause of 
his lack of good-humour when Abner gave 
him the note about Ruy at his porch. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2>

<p>F I was to tell you something now," 
said Mary Shaw, as she brushed 
Felise's hair one morning, ' should 
you be very angry?" blushing scarlet all over 
her neck, and even partly up her forehead as 
she spoke. </p>

<p>"You've a sweetheart," said Felise, laugh- 
ing at the blush which she saw reflected in 
the mirror. ' I can see it in your face." </p>

<p>'Well, perhaps," said Mary; and, encouraged 
by her mistress's smile, went on to tell her 
by little and little of her engagement to 
Abner. </p>

<p>"How sly you have been!" said Felise ; 
' and no one ever suspected you." </p>

<p>"I didn't know how you would like it," 
pleaded Mary; and, the confession over, 
went on to explain the trouble they were in, 
and to beg Felise's help. </p>

<p>If Abner's aged parents were turned out 
of the cottage there would be no possibility 
of Mary's marriage with Abner, for he would 
have no home to cfive her. </p>

<p>A separate home was out of the question — 
it could not be got; the utmost they (or 
other village lovers) could expect was to live 
with the parents of bride or bridegroom. At 
Abner's home there was room; at Mary 
Shaw's there was no room. The Shaw 
cottage was very small, and fully occupied 
by her own parents, an aged uncle who had 
a sort of right to reside with the family, and 
a crippled cousin (a girl). No place could be 
found for a fresh couple. </p>

<p>Once old Abner and his wife were turned 
out of doors, and their hope of future union 
dissolved altoQfether, There was no other 
home for them. Abner might get a bed
somewhere, or he could sleep in a tallet (the 
room over a stable), but cottage there would 
be none for wife or children. </p>

<p>So bitterly does the scarcity of homes 
weigh on the labouring class in the country 
— a scarcity consequent upon the fact that 
almost all existing cottages belong to the 
landowners. Labourers are not able to erect 
houses for themselves, chiefly because they 
cannot get the land for the purpose. The 
few square yards necessary to put a cottage 
on are inaccessible, no one will sell them 
such a plot, most waste places have long 
since been claimed, and squatters are warned 
off those that remain. </p>

<p>The policy of landowners (or landowners" 
agents) has for many years been directed to 
keep down the population, or rather so to 
manage it as to retain control over it. There 
has been a strong current setting against the 
small proprietor, who has not been permitted 
to come into existence. No man has been 
allowed to settle in a parish unless under the
immediate thumb of the landowner or his 
tenants. </p>

<p>Now Abner was in ill-favour with the 
steward, and there was no chance for him. </p>

<p>Already solicitous enough for the poor old 
man and his wife, Felise became still more 
anxious when she understood how Mary's 
future was concerned. She could not think 
what to do; she had already applied to 
Robert Godwin, and been firmly, almost 
rudely denied. </p>

<p>Mary now came to the pith of her com- 
munication. Old Abner Brown was under 
the impression that if he could but see the 
Squire in person, he should succeed. The 
old man dwelt much upon the familiar inter- 
course he had held with the Squire's grand- 
father in the olden times, when the distinction 
between the cottacje and the mansion was 
not so sharply drawn. </p>

<p>He had had small ' deals ' with the old 
Squire; he had run beside the pony when the 
present Squire's father was learning to ride; </p>



<p>he had worked half a century ago In the 
gardens attached to the mansion at Maas- 
bury. If he could but see ' t" Squire" face to 
face and speak with him, he felt sure he 
should not be turned out of his cottage and 
garden. </p>

<p>To Felise, unlearned in the ways of the 
world, this seemed reasonable, and she went 
at once to Mr. Goring, to ask him how best 
they could obtain an audience of ' t" Squire." </p>

<p>Mr. Goring, In snowy shirt-sleeves, was 
sitting under his favourite russet apple-tree, 
taking his luncheon, which consisted of fruit, 
bread, and a little Burgundy in a tall old 
glass. From that spot there was a pleasant 
glimpse — not a view — a glimpse of the 
meadows which came up to the orchard 
fence. </p>

<p>He laughed at the idea of ' t" Squire ' 
taking into account the services old Abner 
had rendered to his grandfather. Besides, 
he would be in London, as Parliament was 
sitting — no, on second thoughts, he remem- </p>

<p>bered Cornleigh Cornleig"h, Esq., was at 
home pending some political proceedings in 
contemplation, of which more presently. The 
man was at home, and could be seen every 
Wednesday — this was Wednesday — about 
noon in the justice-room at The House. </p>

<p>He sat there when at home to administer 
the law upon rogues and vagabonds — such 
offences as could be dealt with by one magis- 
trate; the petty sessions being held once a 
fortnight. It would be easy to see him 
there, and old Abner no doubt could make 
his application as soon as the rogues were 
disposed of; but it was perfectly useless. </p>

<p>Felise wished to try — Mr. Goring would 
not say he did not mind her trying, and yet 
he did not say she should not. In truth, any 
application to such a person was distasteful 
to him; yet there was the incontrovertible 
fact of his being in authority, and no one else 
could save poor old Abner from his doom. 
While Goring hesitated, Felise ran and 
ordered the pony-carriage, and sent Shaw
down to tell the old man she would call for 
him in ten minutes. </p>

<p>Mr. Goring sat by his luncheon, which 
was now unheeded, and heard the pony- 
carriao^e gfo rattlinof down the road. The 
glass of Burgundy was untouched — a wasp 
came to the fruit upon his plate. </p>

<p>This was one of the bitter moments of his 
life, bringing home to him his impotence to 
do good. Had he bustled about in the 
world, perhaps by this time he would have 
made sufficient money to enable him to carry 
out his wishes. How easily a cottage might 
have been built had he but had a hundred 
and fifty pounds at his disposal! </p>

<p>He had neglected to struggle with the 
world, and the world was his master. He 
had retired out of the dust of the batde, 
weary of the selfishness, the sham, and cant. 
As a result, in the midst of his peaceful trees, 
he was powerless. He had not even made 
political capital of his views, and had no 
circle of friends to back him up. </p>

<p>If anyone elects to dwell with himself 
alone in a garden planted with his own trees, 
and a mind stocked with his own ideas, he 
must suffer this deprivation. </p>

<p>It was not the first time he had felt this; 
but he thought he had shut out the world 
behind his trees, and behind his own ad- 
vancing years. Now he found he had not 
done so. </p>

<p>Meditating thus the wine became tasteless, 
the fruit sour; his trees appeared but timber, 
the meadow only grass — the idea, the thought, 
the fancy was gone from all. Had he then 
wasted upon these the mind that should have 
been devoted to his fellow-creatures? </p>

<p>One thing he determined upon; he would 
no longer remain silent. He would make 
the wants and the sufferings of these poor 
people known; he would appeal to old 
friends whose letters had ceased to reach 
him these twenty years; he would stir, and 
act, and speak as well as dream among his 
flowers and trees. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2>

<p>KNOWED there was something 
as I had to tell you," said old 
Abner, crouched in the pony- 
carriage, his knees nearly touching his chin, 
and holding one of his sticks with both 
hands. ' I knowed there was something 
when you called that day. But bless you, 
they won't never turn I out of that there 
ofarden." </p>

<p>Entering the outskirts of the town they 
saw Mrs. Cornleigh Cornleigh, a shaven 
young cleric with her, just coming from a 
model farm-building. Felise glanced at her, 
half drew rein, hesitated, and drove on again. 
To appeal to a woman would in theory be
the best proceeding, yet Felise did not do 
so. Something prevented her from making 
the attempt, partly perhaps the reluctance 
one woman feels to beg anything of another 
woman — partly some recollection of the cha- 
racter Mrs. Cornleigh Cornleigh bore. </p>

<p>A handsome woman, she had not the least 
beauty. Letitia Cornleigh Cornleigh pos- 
sessed a good figure; a little full perhaps, 
but not so full as is usual at her age, for she 
had long passed forty. Indeed, an air of 
hard self-preservation was her most pro- 
nounced expression. She seemed, as you 
looked at her, to defy you and Time and all 
alike. </p>

<p>Her features were small, well-cut, and 
regular; her teeth singularly good, and 
pearly; her hair pale yellow ; her eyes a 
clear light blue, with long lashes. She had 
most of the groundwork and foundation of 
loveliness; she was handsome, yet without 
beauty. Perhaps it was her haughty bold- 
ness which repelled the observer — the
so
haughty boldness which said, ' I am so high, 
so irreproachable, I can say anything, do 
anything, go anywhere, because I am JLetitia 
Cornleigh Cornleigh." </p>

<p>At a distance this expression was not seen; 
looked at, for instance, by gas-light from 
the balcony of a ball-room, Mrs. Cornleigh 
Cornleigh appeared superb. Could she have 
been painted from a distance she would have 
been pronounced an exceptionally handsome 
woman. </p>

<p>This haughty, innocent boldness sometimes 
led to queer positions, as when she questioned 
the veterinary surgeon so closely respecting 
a horse they were examining as to put the 
poor man to the blush. </p>

<p>Letitia was very clever, very clever; and it 
was quite understood that she was the ruler — 
Cornleigh reigned, and Letitia governed. In 
fact, she had been selected (being almost 
dowerless) for this purpose, for Cornleigh's 
parents and friends were aware that some 
one with a strong will was needed to guide
him. So the marriage was negotiated, and 
everyone said, ' What a good thing it was for 
Cornleigh! Wonderful woman of business ! 
Capital thing for Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>The phrase became established, and it was 
the regular thing to remark, whenever the 
improvements at Maasbury town were men- 
tioned, or any allusion made to the family, 
' By-the-bye, what a good thing it was for 
Cornleigh when he married Letitia! Capital 
thing for Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>All the improvements which had straitened 
the old town, depriving it of its pleasant ap- 
pearance and of its ancient freedom, sprang 
from Mrs. Cornleio-h Cornleisfh. </p>

<p>With her, too, there came into existence a 
new law, especially applicable to and enforced 
in the country part of the estate; but whether 
this law originated with her, or from the 
swarm of shaven clericalism around her, was 
never quite clear. With her reign, at all 
events, it was first promulgated, and had 
since been carried out with the utmost
seventy. As she was undoubtedly the 
master-spirit at The House, popular opinion 
appeared in the right in attributing the 
execution — if not the inception — to Letitia. </p>

<p>This statute ordained that if any cottage 
girl disgraced herself and became the mother 
of illegitimate offspring, forthwith the cottage 
was to be cleared of all its inhabitants. The 
girl, the parents, the grandfather, all and 
sinofle who chanced to dwell within its walls 
were summarily cleared out, and denied any 
residence upon the estate. If the marriage 
ceremony had been performed — however late 
in the day — the matter was permitted to 
drop. If not, if it had been omitted — no 
matter what the extenuating circumstances — 
out they must turn, bag and baggage, young, 
middle-aged, and decrepit, to take their chance 
in the world. </p>

<p>Punishment was thus dealt out in a retro- 
spective manner to everyone, however re- 
motely concerned, and might fall on four 
generations: on the helpless infant, the
mother, her parents, and grand-parents. It 
would be impossible to imagine anything 
more cruel, more unjust, more utterly in- 
human. </p>

<p>The cottage was simply cleaned out, as it 
might be for sanitary purposes during a 
plague, and the whole family swept as if with 
a broom from off the country-side. </p>

<p>This inhuman and abominable law, sur- 
passing all that transpires in the darkest 
places of Russia, was strictly enforced. </p>

<p>The rulers at The House, whether the 
haughty lady or her shaven advisers, looked 
with such sacerdotal horror upon this inex- 
piable crime that nothing less than absolute 
extinction could suffice. The estate — the 
lands of Cornleigh Cornleigh, Esq. — must be 
made sweet and clean. Such horrible con- 
tamination must be removed from the sur- 
f^ice of that part of the earth which he 
possessed. </p>

<p>Village girls are exposed to great tempta- 
tion, and have to go through a rude ordeal. </p>



<p>Besides which they have feehngs, these poor 
girls, and sometimes succumb to love; you 
would scarce believe it, would you? The 
scarcity of cottages, and the difficulty of 
obtaining possession of one, often put an 
almost insurmountable obstacle in the wav of 
marriage, which obstacle is mainly due to the 
policy of keeping cottages under the tenant- 
farmer's control for the supposed benefit of 
the estate. The House thus kept the popula- 
tion short of cottages, and then punished 
those who transgressed for want of a home 
of their own. </p>

<p>This law had been put in force several 
times since Felise came as a child to Beech- 
knoll, but she had never heard of it. No 
one ever spoke to her of such things. Some- 
thing in the child's aspect stilled the giddy 
tongues that gossiped so freely. To the 
woman grown, no one — not even Mary 
Shaw, favourite as she was — would have pre- 
sumed to mention it. Her pure beauty sur- </p>

<p>rounded her with a rampart across which no 
evil could penetrate. </p>

<p>Feudal statutes of this kind still exist here 
and there, although this particular law is not 
common. Not only the law, but the power 
to make the law was the wrong in Mr. 
Goring's opinion. Why should any one 
person possess the power to issue such a 
ukase? They do possess the power, and 
will do so while nine-tenths of each agricul- 
tural hamlet are at the absolute disposal of 
the proprietor of the soil. </p>

<p>If the people lived in their own houses, 
however humble those houses might be, 
nothing of the sort would be possible. But 
they do not live in their own houses. All 
the efforts of generations after generations of 
Cornlcigh Cornleighs have been directed to 
compel them to dwell in landowners" houses, 
under the thumb of the tenant-farmer and 
the steward. </p>

<p>It may be said, there is nothing to prevent
a man living in his own house; but how can 
you build a house without land to put it on? 
How can you get that land if Cornleigh 
Cornleigh will not sell it to you? </p>

<p>Cornleigh Cornleigh, Esq., had got the 
land. </p>

<p>Felise glanced at the upright form of Mrs. 
Cornleigh Cornleigh, and decided not to 
appeal to her. She drove on to the lodge- 
gates, and asked there for the justice-room; 
at that word she was rudely told to go 
round to the back, and left to find her way 
to the back as well as she might. A 
passer-by gave her the information — 
he was a young man, and glad to assist 
beauty. </p>

<p>They had to go round some distance and 
approach The House from another quarter 
up a long lane; but found a high iron 
gate across the lane, and had to wait till it 
pleased a woman to open it. Then it was a 
regulation that no horse or vehicle must pass
farther; the pony-carriage had to be left 
there, just inside the gate, to fare as it 
might. FeHse and her client went down the 
lane afoot; there was a wall twenty feet high 
each side. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2>

<p>HE old man walked very slowly 
with two sticks, and paused each 
step to look about him. He was 
puzzled; he had not been into the town for 
years, and the place was so altered he did 
not know it. </p>

<p>"Why, this lane," he said presently, speak- 
ing in his own dialect which I translate, 
' used to be a public road, and that side was 
the park; it was all open then. What, 
won't they let nobody go in the park, then? 
That side there was a row of big elms; they 
be cut down then, and that there wall builded. 
Well, to be sure! Where's the church ?" he
asked, as they came to a turning. * Be he 
jT^one, then?" </p>

<p>He had forgotten that he had heard all 
about the changes from others. To the very 
aged, as to children, to hear of a thing is 
very different to seeing it; they do not realise 
it till they see it. </p>

<p>The church was gone, sure enough, and 
nothing left to mark the site; tombs, stones, 
all moved out of the way. It dated from the 
twelfth century, and was considered an archi- 
tectural treasure; it was, too, pleasant to 
look at, with its ivy, the great elms adjacent, 
and the rookery in them, where the rooks 
in springtime caw, caw, and the jackdaws 
jack, jack, daw — made such a noise to com- 
pensate for the silence of the dead under 
them. </p>

<p>Wood -pigeons came to the elms some- 
times; thrushes sang in the ancient gnarled 
hawthorns, old as the days of matchlocks; 
they came, too, to the walls of the old 
church for the ivy-berries. There were
grey buttresses propping up the bank of 
the graveyard, and in these grey buttresses 
the blue tits had nests deep in the cavi- 
ties. Old Abner minded taking a tit's nest 
there when he was a boy — seventy years 
ago. </p>

<p>The church was gone; the graveyard clean 
dug away, buttresses and all; the elms down, 
and the site occupied by the various ' offices ' 
common to the precincts of a mansion. </p>

<p>Letitia did not like the church — that grey 
antiquity — so near the drawing-room; there 
were funerals in churches, babies brought to 
be christened, and bells were rung. Besides, 
it obstructed that clear sweep which ought to 
be found round a mansion; in short, it was 
in the way: there could be no ring-fence 
while it stood there with the public road 
leading up to it. </p>

<p>Her shaven advisers hailed the idea of 
removing it — which entailed building a new 
one elsewhere — with vast delight. To build 
a great new church was to them an immense
profit — the profit of the personal social in- 
lluence which repays those who 'labour" in 
these movements. Such is the secret motive 
in half the church restorations throughout the 
country— the glorification of the 'labourer" 
who sets all this afoot. </p>

<p>Those who understand human nature will 
readily perceive that the town subscribed 
liberally to this work which was to deprive it 
of its chief feature, to shut up its park, and 
to close a valuable right of way. </p>

<p>Many a painter had come to look at and 
sketch the ancient building. Therein reposed 
the entire history of Maasbury town. The 
births, the marriages, the deaths of six 
hundred years were enclosed in it like a 
casket. All the associations of the old 
families of the town were bound up in it. </p>

<p>The children for hundreds of years had 
played in the park, gathering the buttercups, 
inhaling the fresh sweet air, building up their 
little frames with store of health. </p>

<p>The open lane gave access to one side of
the town — the only access for vehicles with- 
out going round a long distance. </p>

<p>To deprive themselves of these advantages 
the inhabitants subscribed most liberally; they 
held public meetings to give the necessary 
sanction to the enterprise; they signed peti- 
tions and memorials, and never ceased to 
agitate till it was accomplished. Nor were 
they satisfied till the very bones of their 
ancestors had been shovelled away and 
stables built on the site of their ancient 
altar. Such is Public Spirit. </p>

<p>Those who do not understand human 
nature would have expected a strenuous op- 
position to be offered to these changes. 
Very likely they will, too, repeat the satisfied 
remark we so often hear about our successful 
system of self-government. </p>

<p>Our towns are governed by servility or 
clique; true self-government is totally un- 
known. </p>

<p>"Where's the mill?" was the old man's next 
inquiry. </p>

<p>The mill which stood under the elms and 
rookery, and was remarkable for a curious 
wheel, was gone too. </p>

<p>"Where's the dove-cot?" said he. </p>

<p>The dove-cot, which the monks had erected 
four hundred years since, had disappeared. </p>

<p>Letitia had succeeded in forming a clear 
sweep round the mansion, and its privacy 
was now complete. It was absolutely isolated, 
and guarded by lodge-keepers in every direc- 
tion. </p>

<p>High walls shut in the view, and led the 
intruder, like a covered way, to a narrow 
passage, damp and cold even on a summer's 
day, in which was a door and bell. On 
justice-room days if you rang the bell you 
were admitted to the justice-room. </p>

<p>When people saw how Letitia was en- 
closing the mansion, making all things modern 
and taking an iron grip of Maasbury, they 
said, 'Capital thing for Cornleigh! Just the 
wife for Cornleiq-h!" </p>

<p>It took Felise full a quarter of an hour to
get the old man along from the iron gate to 
the door in the damp passage, so exercised 
was he over these changes. They seemed 
to quite turn his brain, and set his mind 
upside down — as the world had been turned 
since his day. </p>

<p>Inside the door they mounted a flight of 
dark steps, and emerged in the justice-room. </p>

<p>There were two large windows in it look- 
ing on the ' offices ' which covered the site of 
the ancient church; a large table in the centre 
at which were two chairs, one an armchair; 
a bookcase, and a form against the wall. 
About the table there was a carpet: that part 
of the room where the public stood was 
carpetless. </p>

<p>The bookcase, curiously enough, stood 
near the door by which the public entered. 
It was filled from the top to the bottom shelf 
with a set of volumes exactly alike, bound in 
morocco; and Felise, as she passed it, noticed 
that the backs of the books were lettered in 
gold, ' The Sporting Calendar." </p>

<p>Cornleigh Cornleigh was very exact in 
this particular: 'The Sporting Calendar" 
was specially bound for him year after year 
in the same style, and deposited in this 
bookcase. One would have fancied that a 
favourite work would have been kept in the 
library, or in the Squire's private study, not 
in a semi-public apartment, bare and com- 
fortless. </p>

<p>This was one of the Cornleigh Cornleigh 
anomalies; and yet perhaps it was not so 
singular, as the Squire never entered the 
library, and had no private study, nor did he 
ever open these sporting volumes he so care- 
fully accumulated. He had been to race- 
courses, and had heard the slanof of the rine 
from his youth up; but he had never made a 
bet in his life. </p>

<p>* The Sporting Calendar ' was absolutely 
useless to him. You may frequently observe 
analogous cases — valuable volumes on the 
shelves of persons who never consult them, 
while genuine students can scarcely obtain an
extract. Why Cornleigh Cornleigh put so 
much stress upon the possession of ' The 
Sporting Calendar," why he did this and 
many other things, is not to be easily 
come at. </p>

<p>"T" Squire!" ejaculated old Abner, as he 
caught sight of the magistrate at the table. </p>

<p>"Silence!" cried a constable ; then seeing 
Felise, his aggressive voice dropped, and he 
motioned them to a hard wooden form placed 
against the wall opposite the table. There 
they sat down — Felise and the ancient 
labourer — side by side, like Beauty and the 
Beast. </p>

<p>Some uninteresting cases were being dis- 
posed of; they must wait till public business 
was finished. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>

<p>ORNLEIGH CORNLEIGH sat
sideways in his armchair, facing a 
little towards the window, and 
apparently listened with the deepest attention 
to the details of the prosecution. His whole 
mind seemed to be concentrated upon the 
business before him. </p>

<p>His youthful face was rather prepossess- 
incr; he was a blonde man, and his features 
had an expression of ingenuousness, such as 
is proper to youth. The countenance of 
eighteen had been carried on through the 
years, and remained set on the shoulders of 
the man of fifty. The face had not grown 
with time. </p>





<p>His light hair was parted at the side, and 
brushed back precisely as his fond mother 
had parted it and brushed it back in his 
school-days. It had never obtained a dis- 
tinctive set and character. Nor was there 
the least trace of beard or moustache. </p>

<p>A line — one single thin line — ran up his 
forehead, and remained there always, the 
groove of effort, of mental labour. A little 
mind has to work harder than a great one, 
and such work leaves traces behind it. His 
chin was the best part, being well cut, and 
somewhat indicative of will, an indication it 
so far fulfilled that although he was the 
worst hand at speechmaking in the world, 
he never shrank from the task, and it was 
whispered that even Letitia had discovered 
he could not be driven beyond a certain 
point. </p>

<p>A habit of always looking downwards, as 
if listening to a sermon, concealed very good 
blue eyes, which, half-closed in this way, were 
conspicuously fringed with whitish eyelashes. </p>

<p>You saw nothing but the eyelids and the 
whitish eyelashes. </p>

<p>It was his way to sit sideways in this 
manner, his hands folded, ingenuously look- 
ing downwards, in a state of the profoundest 
attention — or of the most perfect indiffer- 
ence. </p>

<p>Not a trace of his fifty years appeared in 
his countenance or hair; he looked not a day 
over thirty. His dress was faultless, marked 
with a red-silk handkerchief, the corner of 
which always projected from the breast- 
pocket. Only long practice and great skill 
could have so folded the inevitable red-silk 
handkerchief, that precisely the same extent 
of its edge should invariably be visible. In 
this particular, as in ' The Sporting Calendar," 
the Squire was very exact. </p>

<p>Nothing in his attitude betrayed the 
slightest interest in the entry of Felise, 
although such a person was seldom indeed 
to be seen in the justice-room. No curiosity 
was shown by casual glances in her direc- </p>



<p>tion; it might have been a matter of con- 
jecture if he had or had not seen her come 
in. The fringe of whitish eyelashes was 
not raised — not the faintest sparkle of in- 
quiry could be traced in the expression of his 
face. </p>

<p>Yet they were a singular and unique pair, 
these two sitting upon the hard wooden form, 
side by side in the justice-room, at the rear 
of constables, and ill-savoured rogues and 
vagabonds standing up for sentence. </p>

<p>Clad in the simplest and plainest of black 
dresses, Felise's exceptional loveliness only 
shone the purer. </p>

<p>His two sticks in one withered hand, his 
chin not far from his knees, his shrunken 
cheeks the hue of clay, colourless for lack of 
blood — of beefsteaks and ale — the patriarch 
swung his body to and fro, muttering to him- 
self, ' I knowed yer grandfather." </p>

<p>The magistrate's clerk, who also sat at 
the table, was quite alive to the contrast, 
and frequently glanced towards the form; </p>

<p>so did the sergeant of police present, and 
even the rogue and vagabond in the cor- 
ner just sentenced to fourteen days for beg- 
ofinof. </p>

<p>But whether Cornleigh Cornleigh saw 
FeHse or not, it was impossible to deter- 
mine. The man was inscrutable. </p>

<p>People for years past had asked them- 
selves similar questions about Cornleigh; if 
he saw, or did not see? whether he saw and 
kept things to himself, or whether his mind 
was a blank? He seemed to be listening 
intently, to be pondering profoundly, but 
nothinof ever came of it. </p>

<p>The gamekeeper, who knew him best, 
used to puzzle in his cups over the 
point, and told many anecdotes illustrating 
the subject. When out alone with the 
Squire shooting, he had seen a hare run 
right between Cornleigh's legs, and Corn- 
leigh never so much as took his gun from 
under his arm. The hare ran by and 
escaped. ' For, of course, I couldn't fire till
he did," said the keeper; ' I couldn't take the 
game out of his mouth. But he never lifted 
his gun." </p>

<p>Another time the Squire did put up his 
gun and aim at a partridge, or at least point 
it at a covey; and after a minute or two, 
during which the birds flew out of range, he 
took it down again without pulling the trigger. 
On the other hand, when there was a party 
of sportsmen out with him, the Squire shot 
better than any of them, and was noted as a 
marksman. </p>

<p>"Nobody can't make him out," said the 
keeper. ' But let folk say what they likes 
agen him, there's one thing as / can say. He 
have never give me nothing — he bean't free- 
handed loike some gcnnelmen — but he never 
don't find no fault. He comes and looks at 
the chicks or at the puppies, but he never 
finds no fault. He don't nag. I have been 
with him nineteen year, and he have never 
said a word to I." </p>

<p>This, however, did not decide the question
as to whether the Squire did or did not see 
things. </p>

<p>* But you look here," went on the keeper, 
growing- warm over his ale. ' 'TIs very well 
knowed as he takes after his grandfather in 
his face — well, now you look here. His 
grandfather, as folk says, knowed all the 
pretty wenches for ten mile round, and 
knowed a deuced sight too much about 
'em. But this yer one never looks at no 
girls." </p>

<p>Inscrutability was the Squire's chief cha- 
racteristic. </p>

<p>Ingenuous and docile, he had always done 
as he was bid. He obeyed his mother with- 
out question; he married Letitia because the 
sagacious old lady bade him. Since then he 
had obeyed Letitia. </p>

<p>He did as he was bid by his steward, 
Robert Godwin. He did as he was bid by 
his solicitor, who prompted him at public 
meetings. By virtue of his position, he sat 
as chairman at the Petty Sessions, and pro- </p>



<p>nounced the sentences whispered to him by 
his rio-ht-hand man. He did as he was bid 
by the party- whip in Parliament. </p>

<p>"Just the thing for Cornleigh! Capital 
thing for Cornleigh! Just the wife for Corn- 
leigh!" they said when it was seen how she 
was leading him in the correct path; how 
the waste lands were claimed; the lanes 
diverted; the estate enclosed in a rigid ring- 
fence; the town straitened — all for the profit 
of the property. ' Most energetic woman, 
and just the wife for Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>There were ladies in the town who, in 
strict privacy, could not endure Letitia. * So 
masterful you know, dear;" because, in short, 
she was the grey mare. Every woman likes 
her own way, but no woman can endure to 
see another woman master even over a man 
who does not concern her. They hated the 
grey mare, and very carefully copied the 
dresses she wore. </p>

<p>Hard sentences were frequently pronounced 
at the Petty Sessions where Cornleigh sat
as chairman — justice's justice — it was not 
peculiar to Maasbury. Cornleigh delivered 
them sitting sideways with folded hands, 
looking downwards, and every now and then 
raising the whitish fringe of his eyelids and 
jerking his words out, to again relapse into 
the downward gaze. Not the slightest sym- 
pathy, pity, or interest ever appeared in his 
face or in the tones of his voice. With right 
and equity he had nothing to do; he simply 
said what was put into his mouth. </p>

<p>Some of the old folk in the town, well- 
to-do folk who remembered his handsome 
grandfather — said to have disputed the first 
place for nobility of appearance with Byron — 
felt a sneaking kindness for the Squire in 
spite of the straitened town, in spite of his 
absolute lack of interest in the place which 
belonged to him, and the innumerable petty 
acts of oppression perpetrated under his 
authority. </p>

<p>There was not one of these old families 
that had not at different times rendered
services to the House of Cornleigh. They 
would have been amply satisfied with recog- 
nition in the streets, with a nod, a wave of 
the hand; they fancied they were entitled to 
this. They did not receive it. </p>

<p>Cornleigh never saw them; he passed 
them just as he passed the pillar-box; he 
would look them right in the face without 
knowing it. Yet if he was spoken to he 
would answer affably, and even offer a cigar, 
and the next day go by the same individual 
without turninof his head. </p>

<p>As for Letitia, she trampled on them in 
contemptuous indifference. ' Such a capital 
thing for Cornleigh! Just the wife for Corn- 
leigh!" Now in course of time it usually 
happens that great houses, even houses like 
the House of Cornleigh, come to need 
friends: Letitia's was hardly the way to 
secure them. </p>

<p>But there are people in this servile world 
who will endure any trampling, and at the 
first beck rush delightedly to proffer their
assistance. Perhaps Letitia understood this. 
These old folk — in order to disQfuise their 
inborn servility from themselves — used to 
say that after all it was not Cornleigh; he 
was all right; he did not do these things, 
only his agents, and of course a gentleman 
could not be expected to know everything 
his groom was about. If only Cornleigh 
Cornleigh could be got at he would be a 
very good fellow indeed. </p>

<p>The Squire was inimitable in doing 
nothing. He pottered about in a way not 
easily described, because to describe you 
must mention something, and Cornleigh did 
nothing to mention. If he took up the 
newspaper he did not read it; in fact, he 
never read anything. He sat about, and 
presently strolled down to the estate-office; 
then came out and stood in the doorway, 
and lit his cigar and looked up and down 
the street, seeing no one. </p>

<p>His cigar was always an especially good
one — Cornleigh was exact in his cigars as 
in his ' Sporting Calendar;" it was a common 
remark in the hotel bars, ' This cigar is equal 
to Cornleigh's!" </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2>

<p>I IS morning cigar usually led him 
across the now secluded and 
private park, and along a narrow 
waggon-track to the gamekeeper's. After 
looking at the puppies or the coops without 
a word, the Squire would go back into the 
waggon-track, and post himself against a 
gate under an oak-tree. </p>

<p>He often had dogs with him; and, as he 
began his second cigar, he let these dogs 
hunt as they listed, driving pheasants one 
way, chicks another, giving tongue at rabbits, 
' and jest playing old Harry, hang 'em!" said 
the keeper, with an accent on * 'em ' that
So
made it sound perilously like ' him." Here 
the Squire enjoyed his cigar in the sunshine, 
and looked downwards at nothing. He was 
often here for an hour at a time. </p>

<p>Sometimes the dogs would come back to his 
feet, fawn on him, and streak his trousers 
with their sandy paws; finding he took no 
notice, away they ran again to chivy every- 
thing in the hedofe. </p>

<p>Occasionally a blue jay crossed over from 
the firs and screamed to his fellow just as 
he reached the ash cover. Squirrels darted 
out into the lane, limping along the ground, 
and rushed back at the sound of the 
scampering dogs. </p>

<p>The white clouds drifted over — shadow 
and sunshine; light airs rustled the oak 
leaves; sweet summer sounds whispered over 
grass and spray. </p>

<p>Enclosed within its thick bark the oak was 
passive to the beauty of the summer hours. 
As unobservant as the oak, it seemed that 
the man, enclosed in a thick bark of indif- </p>

<p>ference, was passive as the timber; he neither 
saw nor heard, </p>

<p>A maxim, well established, is that the man 
or the woman always come out in their 
deeds. Whatever they may profess, in time 
the act betrays them, and upon that outward 
act and deed the world invariably bases its 
opinion of their character. Is this just? </p>

<p>Do you always do as you would like to do 
were it in your power? I find that circum- 
stances force me often to act in a manner 
quite opposite to what I should prefer; I am 
of course judged by my acts, but do they 
really afford a true key to my character? I 
think not. </p>

<p>What passes in a man's mind it is not 
possible to tell, and in despite of Cornleigh's 
apparent indifference, it occurs to me to 
hazard the inquiry whether after all, he did 
not see the sunshine, the green leaf, the 
flower-grown grass. Did he in some dim 
way enter into the frolic joy of his dogs, 
released from control? Did he enjoy the
quiet — the absolute do-nothing- of the lane? 
Did he slumber awake under the rich colour 
of the sky, seeing it without looking? </p>

<p>There was no Letitia in nature; no one 
with a loud voice who must be obeyed. </p>

<p>The keeper believed the Squire, when the 
family were at their house in London, made 
up pretences to rundown a day or two, just to 
come and do his cigar in the lane. ' He likes 
to do nothing with nobody to help him," said 
^he keeper. </p>

<p>There was some resemblance in this to the 
oak's passive happiness in self-absorption — 
receiving the sun's rays, receiving the air as 
it blew; silent under the song of birds ; doing 
nothing, saying nothing; simply existing. So 
it seemed as if Cornleigh simply existed. </p>

<p>Wits in the town asked the question if 
Cornleigh did or did not know himself to 
be a fool? Some thought his mind so per- 
fect a blank as to be also oblivious to his 
own failings. Others thought they detected 
a painful consciousness of his own defects, </p>

<p>and averred that his supineness was only a 
cloak. The dispute was never settled. </p>

<p>A French saying, I think, points out that 
everyone has his own way of getting out of 
the rain. Possibly quiescence — doing as he 
was bid, without will of his own — was Corn- 
leigh's method. </p>

<p>But if indeed the man was conscious, or 
partly conscious of mental deficiency, then a 
great sadness is wound up with the lot of 
Cornleigh Cornleigh, master of so many 
many acres; a mere helpless jelly in the 
hands of Letitia. </p>

<p>How singularly just and thoughtful the 
world was in its way! ' Just the thing for 
Cornleigh! Capital thing for Cornleigh [ 
Most energetic woman — ^just the thing for 
Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>The oak's passive existence was perhaps 
his only refuge. There was, indeed, a 
whisper that Letitia even could not drive 
him beyond a certain point; he would have 
his ease; he would not work and slave in
society all the year round; he would smoke 
his cigar in the lane. Wise in her generation, 
Letitia soon learned to let him alone in this 
one particular. </p>

<p>The dogs came back again and fawned 
upon him — he did not stroke them — they 
rolled on the grass and left him once more 
for the hedges. All dogs and animals were 
very fond of him, though he showed not 
the slightest interest in them; perhaps they 
saw some companionship in his helpless state 
to their own dumb condition. </p>

<p>Yet you must understand that there was 
no deficiency you could fix on. " Cornleigh 
could write a letter, add up accounts, go 
through all the routine of life as perfectly 
as Letitia herself. Those who most bitterly 
denounced the fool could not mention a 
single foolish whim, a single foolish word, 
not so much as a false step of which he had 
been guilty. </p>

<p>The fool was very self-possessed and 
reasonable in all his ways and actions. </p>

<p>Cornleigh Cornleigh was taken a wide 
round of travel by the most energetic woman, 
but he saw nothing in the countries he was 
carried through. He was once heard to 
remark that there were a good many fir-trees 
in Russia — havino^ ridden in a train for 
six hundred miles through fir-woods — but 
that was the only circumstance he had 
noticed. </p>

<p>His speeches at election-times were written 
out for him by his solicitor and Letitia; he 
learned them by heart and jerked them out, 
bits at a time, interspersed with hums and 
haws. This had not mattered in the least; 
the place had been under Robert Godwin's 
thumb, and his return had been certain. If 
the Squire had held up a dog in his arms 
to bark for him to the crowd, his success 
would have been equally great. Some 
awkward changes, however, had of late 
begun to creep even into Maasbury. He had 
sat already nearly twenty-five years in Parlia- 
ment without once opening his lips, but he
was punctually there at the divisions, and 
invariably on the right side. </p>

<p>The question was once propounded — so 
many questions were propounded about Corn- 
leigh — why on earth such a man as this 
was chosen by the gentry as the representa- 
tive of the Borough and Hundreds of Maas- 
bury? Could they not pick a smarter man 
than this from their ranks? </p>

<p>Analysis was made, and it was found 
that there were about fourteen other land- 
owners and J.P.'s in that district, each of 
whom was possessed of sufficient wealth 
to sit in the House of Commons. Yet these 
fourteen had selected Cornleigh — for the 
crowd of voters merely recorded their selec- 
tion. How could this be.^ </p>

<p>On examining the characters of each one 
of these fourteen magnates, however, a 
remarkable discovery was made. Every one 
of these possessed qualities of stupidity more 
marked than Cornleigh's; little acts, words, 
ways, could be mentioned by which each
had branded himself as a more or less con- 
summate ass. </p>

<p>The reason was now apparent why Corn- 
Icigh was chosen; he was the least foolish of 
the lot. </p>

<p>What the state of ^/le/r minds must have 
been, considering that Cornleigh Cornleigh 
stood out as the most sensible of the num- 
ber, it is difficult to conjecture. What 
ever could these other fourteen have been 
like? </p>

<p>From the date when this discovery was 
made Cornleigh rose considerably in the 
estimation of Maasbury; they began to be 
proud of him, and as some one said, ' After 
all, silence is golden." </p>

<p>Moreover, the world always appreciates a 
solid plum, and approves those who get the 
solid plum. Now it was understood that 
Cornleigh's patient voting on the right side 
in every division for five-and-twenty years 
had at last aroused his party to the necessity 
of rewarding such diligence, to encourage the
others. A promise of a baronetage had been 
made, and if only Cornleigh could hold on, 
and appear in Parliament when next his 
party obtained the Government, he would 
be Sir Edward Cornleigh Cornleigh, Bart., 
to a certainty. My Lady Letitia Cornleigh 
already claimed all the precedence the title 
could give her. </p>

<p>A baronetage is a baronetage, or it is not 
a baronetage. Conferred upon an upstart 
millionaire it is nothing; conferred upon an 
ancient county family it indicates very con- 
siderable social rank. The antiquity of the 
house gilds the title. There was no question- 
ing the fact that the House of Cornleigh 
was one of the most ancient in the county. </p>

<p>When it was known that such a promise 
had been given in the responsible quarter, 
a great many wise old fogies, who had never 
looked upon Cornleigh as very bright, began 
to change their tone, and ' By Jove, you know, 
there must be something in the fellow after 
all! But of course it's all Letitia's doing. </p>

<p>Wonderful woman — most energetic woman — 
just the woman for Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>Some manoeuvres in connection with the 
political future rendered Cornleigh's presence 
in the county desirable just now. This 
was why he was at home while Parliament 
was sitting; he ran up to vote in important 
divisions, and returned to his ci^ar in the 
lane. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>

<p>SPECTRE had risen up of recent 
years to disturb the repose of the 
House of Cornleigh. Since the 
passing of the Ballot Act, Letitia had never 
felt quite secure upon her throne, for it 
seemed to her that it threatened to cut the 
very ground away from under their feet, 
especially if, as was threatened, the power 
to vote was extended to the agricultural 
labourers. </p>

<p>If the agricultural labourer was allowed to 
vote — in secret and free from control by aid 
of the Ballot — what would he do to the 
House of Cornleigh? </p>

<p>Robert Godwin reassured her, the family- 
solicitor reassured her, the fourteen other dis- 
trict magnates reassured her; but Letitia 
was a clever woman, and she had instincts 
which far surpassed, in clearness of insight, 
all their logical training and boasted mascu- 
line superiority. Letitia was certain that the 
Ballot, if the labourers obtained votes, would 
put the axe to the root of the tree of Corn- 
leio-h. </p>

<p>After the promise of the baronetage her 
anxiety redoubled, for it became an object of 
the utmost importance that Cornleigh should 
be returned once more to Parliament. Even 
supposing his party did not enter into power, 
still they retained great influence in a high 
quarter, and it was morally certain that he 
would become Sir Edward. </p>

<p>Bitterness therefore was heaped upon the 
abominable Ballot Act: it was the symbol of 
all things vile in the eyes of the Cornleigh 
party, it was un-English, it was directed 
against the dearest traditions of our country; </p>



<p>in short, the Ballot Act, as Gambetta said of 
something- else, was the Enemy. </p>

<p>The Ballot Act is the Act which enables 
every person to go and record his vote 
without fear of after-consequences from the 
vengeance of any party whose wishes he has 
crossed. </p>

<p>The Ballot Act is the Mao-na Charta of 
modern days. </p>

<p>Under it a man can act as he thinks and 
feels, and knows to be right, and is not to be 
overawed by any threat, fear, or authority. </p>

<p>It secures to every Englishman genuine 
liberty, and under it free voting took place 
for the first time in all English history. </p>

<p>The boast of Britain is freedom, but there 
was no freedom till the Ballot became 
law. </p>

<p>I went as a boy to an election to see 
the fighting. Boys like to see fighting; it is 
their nature. There was a crowd about the 
polling booths armed with stout sticks, and 
all wearing a certain colour. If any man
dared to so much as pass by whose colour 
was not their colour, he was set upon and 
beaten. </p>

<p>I retain a vivid mental picture of one man 
on a white horse, who boldly rode up to 
record his vote with his colour — not the 
crowd's colour — in his buttonhole. They 
swarmed round him, these noble freeborn 
people armed with sticks; they beat him on 
his horse, and they beat his horse; they 
dragged him off his horse and beat him, 
holding him up for the purpose; at last he 
fell down and they beat him on the ground, 
and presently began to drag and haul him 
along like a sack, helpless and insensible as 
he was. I lost sight of him in the surging 
mass of freeborn electors, and what became 
of him I do not know. </p>

<p>This was fine fun for boys to look at. 
Now I went to see the fighting, but I never 
forgot the man on the white horse. </p>

<p>To call this freedom appeared to me 
ever afterwards as simply a deliberate lie. </p>



<p>Instead of freedom it was despotism of the 
worst and most tyrannous description. </p>

<p>Under the Ballot Act the man on the 
white horse, if still living, can go up and 
record his vote in perfect safety; the vote he 
has given will never be known; and no 
Robert Godwin can harass him for acting 
according to his conscience. </p>

<p>So deep is the impression made on the 
popular mind by the oppressions visited on 
those who dared to vote as they thought, that 
even now at this day, people have but partly 
rid themselves of the fear that some one will 
seek private and secret vengeance on them 
for doing as they believe right. Those who 
desire to uphold the cause of liberty should 
see that the secrecy of the Ballot is really 
secrecy, for suspicions have got about that it 
is not always so even now. </p>

<p>You can now understand how an en- 
ormous power was taken from the hands of 
Robert Godwin when the new Magna Charta 
was passed, and why Letitia, clever woman
as she was, dreaded the enfranchisement of 
the aofricultural labourer. </p>

<p>The view taken by the Cornleigh party 
was that the Ballot (which secures freedom) 
was demoralising (now just think!) in its 
action on the people, luho had always hitherto 
been accustomed to an atmosphere of freedom. </p>

<p>Is not this a deliberate lie? </p>

<p>This sentence written out by Letitia was 
acquired by heart by the Squire, and in- 
troduced as a climax upon every public 
occasion. The respectable inhabitants of 
Maasbury applauded it to the echo. </p>

<p>This deliberate lie became the motto of the 
Cornleigh party. It is a lie so flagrant — so 
palpable — so coarse and unscrupulous, that it 
is a marvel any English gentleman can make 
up his mind to utter it. </p>

<p>Though there was no special trade in 
Maasbury — and not many shoemakers with 
their radical awls — still there were large 
workshops, there was a railway station and 
its attendant workmen, there were bricklayers
ij6
(fearfully wicked, self-willed people, brick- 
layers — nearly as bad as shoemakers), and 
some very large brickfields, the home of des- 
peration, according to the Cornleigh creed. </p>

<p>At the last election these folk, voting at 
last without fear of Robert Godwin and his 
agents (wonderful it is that such men should 
iind so many willing tools in the practice of 
oppression), these men ran Cornleigh Corn- 
leigh, Esq., very hard indeed, and reduced 
his usual majority to a mere handful. </p>

<p>Was it not natural then that Letitia, with 
the title of ' My Lady ' hanging before her 
eyes, should be fearful of the next elec- 
tion? </p>

<p>Even if the next election came and found 
the agricultural labourers still without the 
right to vote, it must not be forgotten that it 
would be Cornleigh's final chance. The 
labourers" claims could not be postponed any 
longer; if not at the next election, at the 
next after that they would be sure to vote, 
and how then with Cornleigh Cornleigh? </p>

<p>And there was another consideration. An 
election is a costly matter: if he was secure 
of return, the money was well spent; but if 
Cornleigh's narrow majority melted away 
and he lost it, the money would be wasted. </p>

<p>The diabolical Ballot Act — the abominable 
Ballot Act — with its demoralising influence 
on a people hitherto accustomed to an 
atmosphere of freedom! </p>

<p>There had been rumours flying about for 
some time that in despite of having married 
so energetic a woman, and in despite of 
having wrung the last shilling from the 
tenants, Cornleigh was not so rich as he 
ought to be, considering the extent of his 
property. Seasons had been bad, and 
although the district had partially escaped 
at first, still they had been trying and un- 
profitable, and there was now very serious 
trouble among the tenants. The expenses 
of the exquisite Letitia, and of the young 
Cornleigh boys and girls, were no trifle. 
Personally the Squire never seemed to spend
a shilling, unless for a new silk handkerchief 
for his coat-pocket. </p>

<p>Yet there were rumours of borrowed 
money; rumours of the mansion being about 
to be let — imagine the loss to the town in 
the absence of 'the family" on the Con- 
tinent! — rumours of the Squire's being afraid 
to face the cost of another and perhaps 
dubious election; rumours of his having in- 
timated an intention of not appearing again 
as a candidate unless the party liberally 
supported him with money. </p>

<p>These rumours had so far an aspect of 
truth, that the Squire, instead of being in 
London, was at home while Parliament was 
sitting. But everyone was confident that 
Letitia would manage things: 'Just the 
woman for Cornleigh! Capital thing for 
Cornleigh!" </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2>

<p>UT some thought [it strange that 
the House of Cornleigh should 
fear the serfs upon its wide 
domain — those serfs who had enjoyed for 
so many centuries its fostering care. Why 
fear those poor helpless cottagers whose 
destinies they had swayed so long — whose 
hearts they had doubtless gained by centuries 
of kindness? </p>

<p>Oh foolish House of Cornleigh! Foolish 
Houses of Cornleigh — very much in the 
plural, for they are a multitude in number — 
not to have made friends with Flesh and 
Blood, instead of grasping so blindly only at 
the mud underneath; neglecting and utterly
loo
ignoring the hearts that beat in the home- 
steads, laying hands so ambitiously on the 
mere surface of the earth. </p>

<p>Assuredly the Houses of Cornleigh will be 
swept away when the Browns and Shaws 
and similar folk can give utterance to their 
minds in the practical form of the vote under 
the shelter of Modern Mao-na Charta. </p>

<p>There is nothing so good as Law; nothing 
so evil as the Letter of the Law. Sittino- 
alone in his justice-room, or in the midst of 
the fourteen other magnates at the Petty 
Sessions, Cornleigh administered the Letter 
of the Law in its harshest form to the 
labourers and poor folk who came under the 
jurisdiction of his tribunal. Most unjust — 
though strictly legal — were the sentences 
delivered upon the men who had nominally 
broken their contracts of service with the 
tenant farmers. </p>

<p>It was policy — deep statesmanship — on the 
part of the landowning Petty Sessions in every 
case to strictly administer the Law in favour
of their own tenants. Nor were the tenants 
themselves blameless in bringing such charges 
— legally, yet foolishly — against their men, 
well knowing that the men would not receive 
equity. </p>

<p>Foolish Houses of Cornleigh, making 
yourselves infamous for unjust justice. </p>

<p>The wits in Maasbury dubbed the Squire, 
Mr. Justice Shallow Cornleigh. </p>

<p>The name stuck, but it was unjust to 
Shakespeare's Justice Shallow; for it is a 
remarkable fact that in Shakespeare even the 
despicable characters have traits of manliness. 
Even Pistol beat a man. </p>

<p>Justice Shallow had heard the chimes at 
midnight, had made the acquaintance of the 
dona robas, had been intoxicated (by inference), 
had sown wild oats in his youth. </p>

<p>Mr. Justice Shallow Cornleigh had never 
been man enough to hear the chimes at mid- 
night, nor to sow wild oats. His youth was 
blameless. </p>

<p>Justice Shallow had corn and beeves — </p>

<p>riches gained by his own perseverance and 
parsimony in his settled middle-age. </p>

<p>Mr. Justice Shallow Cornleigh had indeed 
land and beeves, but he had them in the 
same way as the puppy gets the hearthrug — 
because he was born in the family, not because 
of any exertions of his own. </p>

<p>Justice Shallow had spirit enough left in 
his old days to lend Falstaff a thousand 
pounds to push him at Court. </p>

<p>Mr. Justice Shallow Cornleigh scrupu- 
lously bound every volume of ' The Sporting 
Calendar," but had never made a bet. </p>

<p>Justice Shallow, lean and foolish, had 
traits of manliness; but of Cornleigh nothing 
of the sort had ever been recorded. The 
head of the House of Cornleigh was a non- 
entity. </p>

<p>This was his fault, his guilt, his crime, in 
that he did nothing — that he left all things 
to his steward Robert Godwin, to his Letltia, 
to the fourteen other magnates whose sen- 
tences he pronounced in Petty Sessions. </p>

<p>With his authority he stamped their folly, 
and became responsible for it. Iniquity was 
done in his name, and he cast down his eyes 
and did not see it. </p>

<p>It is a terrible thing- when a fool sits in the 
place of power. Oppression is done without 
redress. </p>

<p>The system is beyond defence which per- 
mits fools to sit in the place of power. </p>

<p>Cornleigh himself was personally guiltless, 
but he made possible the crimes of others; 
he signed his name and sanctioned their 
tyrannies. Yet even in Maasbury, where so 
much had been done to alienate everyone, 
there was no animosity against the Squire 
himself. It was felt that it was not 
him. </p>

<p>'Just the thing for Cornleigh! Capital 
thing for Cornleigh! Most energetic woman 
— ^just the woman for Cornleigh!" </p>

<p>Whenever an important division was at 
hand, the Squire ran up to town, patiently 
sat out the debate, recorded his vote on the
I04
right side, and came down home again to his 
morning cigar in the lane. </p>

<p>His morning cigar in the lane under the 
oak was Cornleigh's real life. Cast down 
upon the sward, his gaze did not appear 
conscious of the sunshine or the shade, the 
white clouds drifting over, the squirrels 
leaping, the blackbirds passing from time to 
time. But we do not see with our eyes only; 
we possess a sense which enables us to feel 
that things are there without actually seeing 
them. The outward appearance is not 
always an indication of the inner feelings, any 
more than the acts by which the world judges 
are always of our own free will. The in- 
scrutable Squire may have seen, may have 
felt, and understood much more than he was 
credited with. ' He never looks at no girls," 
said the keeper. </p>

<p>Possibly Cornleigh saw the ' girls ' without 
exhibiting signs of admiration; possibly he 
had sometimes met women whose gentleness 
of demeanour reminded him that a happier
fate might have been his had not a Letitia 
appeared; possibly sweeter feminine in- 
fluences might have led him to act a little for 
himself, to examine and think before he 
affixed his signature to documents, of the 
real effect of which he was now profoundly 
ignorant or indifferent. </p>

<p>Still she was 'just the woman for Corn- 
leigh." </p>

<p>Possibly the Squire, sitting sideways in his 
justice-room, was really perfectly conscious 
of Felise's presence, and not insensible to her 
loveliness. </p>

<p>When at last the business was over, and 
some one asked if anyone wished to make an 
application to the magistrate, Felise motioned 
old Abner to rise, and advanced with him to 
the table. For a moment the Squire glanced 
at her, instantly resuming his downward look. </p>

<p>"You wish to make an application?" said 
the magistrate's clerk. Old Abner did not 
answer him, but stared hard at Cornleigh. </p>

<p>* I knowed yer grandfeyther," he said, </p>

<p>io6
shaking as he held on to the edge of the 
table in lieu of his sticks. For once I must 
write the words as he spoke them. </p>

<p>The Squire did not reply. </p>

<p>"I knowed yer grandfeyther," repeated the 
old labourer. ' You bean't such a man as he 
wur." </p>

<p>"What is it you want?" asked the clerk. </p>

<p>* State what you want," repeated Corn- 
leigh. </p>

<p>"You bean't half the man yer grandfeyther 
wur," said old Abner. * Why doan't yer do 
summat? Why be yer alius at home ? Yer 
grandfeyther used to come round to us folk." </p>

<p>"This is irrelevant," said the clerk. </p>

<p>"Irrelevant," said the Squire. </p>

<p>* Don't you know what you want i*" asked 
the clerk. Had not Felise been there they 
would have quickly hustled the old fellow 
away. </p>

<p>"Want! of course I knows. I wants to 
know why /ic doan't do summat. There be a 
passel [parcel] of fools about, I can tell 'ee." </p>

<p>"His worship cannot sit here to listen to 
this," said the clerk. </p>

<p>* Why bean't yer gone up to Parliament 
House?" said old Brown, quite heedless of 
the clerk. </p>

<p>* Perhaps you will be good enough to ex- 
plain what the man wants," said the clerk, 
addressing Felise. </p>

<p>A little confused by the unfamiliar sur- 
roundings, Felise tried to make them under- 
stand. The clerk helped her by cross- 
questioning, and at last it was clear that the 
application was for permission for the aged 
labourer to end his days in his cottage. </p>

<p>"He has made such a capital garden," said 
Felise, able to speak now. ' He will never 
be able to live away from his garden. Could 
you not let him stay, Mr. Cornleigh? He 
worked for your grandfather and for your 
father — he really has been a faithful old ser- 
vant, and he cannot have much longer to live. 
It is not a great thing to grant. Do, please, 
think how very old and helpless he is T
loS
The Squire glanced at her — the excitement 
had flushed her cheek; she was radiantly- 
beautiful — and as quickly looked down again. </p>

<p>"It is clearly a matter for Mr. Godwin," 
said the clerk. </p>

<p>"Evidently it is a matter for Godwin," said 
the Squire, who always repeated what his 
advisers had said for him. </p>

<p>"No, no," said Felise quickly. ' Do, please, 
decide this one little thing yourself, Mr. 
Cornleigh." </p>

<p>The Squire got up and went into the next 
room, followed by the clerk; they held a 
short consultation, and returned again. </p>

<p>"His worship will confer with his steward," 
said the clerk. </p>

<p>"But — but," said Felise, ' if you would look 
into it yourself, Mr. Cornleigh, you would see 
— you would ' </p>

<p>"Mr. Cornleigh will confer with his 
steward," said the clerk, closing his book and 
rising. </p>

<p>"i — I — hum — ah- -I mean," said the Squire, </p>

<p>as he too rose and began to retreat, glanc- 
ing momentarily, ' I will confer with my 
steward." </p>

<p>"But doan't you know I?" said old Abner, 
as the Squire turned his back. ' Doan't 
you know I? Bless 'ee, I bought pegs of 
yer grandfeyther!" </p>

<p>Squire and clerk were gone together; old 
Abner became very indignant. </p>

<p>* Why didn't he speak to I?" he grumbled. 
' I knowed his grandfeyther. Why doan't he 
do summat hisself? A bean't half the man 
his grandfeyther wur." </p>

<p>Felise could not persuade him to come 
away till the sergeant of police approached, 
and taking the old man by the arm quietly 
led him downstairs, and out into the roadway. 
There he went quietly with her, still muttering 
to himself about the Squire's 'grandfeyther." 
She drove him home, and left him at the 
cottage. </p>

<p>Mr. Goring was not in the least surprised 
at the failure of the attempt; for they con- </p>

<p>sidered it a failure since the Squire was going 
to consult with Mr. Godwin. </p>

<p>Mary Shaw was very dull and down- 
hearted when she heard about it; she had 
had such hopes in her mistress, believing 
that her beauty would be sure to carry the 
day. </p>

<p>In his cottage old Abner was complaining 
to his wife of Felise's interference and bad 
management. He was sure he should have 
got on all right if he had seen the Squire 
by himself, but she spoilt everything. 
' Hur would keep talking," he said. ' Hur 
kept on talk, talk, talk." The truth being 
that he could say nothing for himself, and 
Felise had explained everything. </p>

<p>Ingratitude is the nature of old Abner's 
race; so many hundred years of hard poverty 
and petty oppression have crushed out the 
better feelings, especially in the aged. For 
one act of kindness in eighty years, why 
should they feel grateful? </p>

<p>Still the fact remains that they are un- </p>

<p>grateful, speaking ill of those who wish them 
well, incapable of understanding oroodness 
of heart; the fact remains and renders them 
uninteresting and repellent, so that sympathy 
cannot attach itself to them. A little experi- 
ence of their ways is sufficient to destroy the 
interest of the kindest-hearted. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2>

<p>ELISE was sitting with Martial in 
the shade of the trees in Robert 
Godwin's garden. This was a 
week after the return of Ruy, whose return 
had in fact brought it about, though in a 
manner unknown to either of them. The 
scanty foHage of the tall poplars and dying 
sycamores scarce gave them shelter from 
the slant rays of the evening sun. </p>

<p>In that garden nothing had been planted 
afresh for generations; the boughs fell away 
with age, and no new spray grew to fill 
the interstice, till by degrees there was 
not much left beyond the trunks, stark and 
sere-tipped. </p>

<p>The apples had ceased to bear, and the 
plums, as the felt slips rotted from the 
nails, drooped forward from the wall, destroy- 
ing themselves with their own weight. </p>

<p>The caterpillar had worked its fell intent, 
and the leaves remaining were shrivelled and 
brown. </p>

<p>Mosses grew along the coping of the 
wall, and marked with green lines the mortar 
between the stones. </p>

<p>A ragged hedge had encroached inwards 
on the grass plot; briars and brambles laid 
their hands on the turf. </p>

<p>The sward was whitish-green; neglected 
for twenty years, it had been recently mown, 
and the stalks of the grasses gave it this 
colour. </p>

<p>A sense of scantiness — meanness and scan- 
tiness — was everywhere about the place. 
Before them was the end wall of the house; it 
was narrow and low, and the roof sharp- 
pitched; the grey-stone slates weighed 
heavily on it. Some lichen had partly
covered the brick against which the red 
sunset had shone so many years. The 
one small window at this end overlooking 
the garden was discoloured, and the panes 
seemed to have lost their transparency. </p>

<p>Beyond the house the farm-buildings and 
ricks stood out plainly; no trees intervened 
to give seclusion to the homestead. </p>

<p>The mean and scanty house, the bare 
trees, the whitish-green grass plot, the entire 
absence ot flowers, the gravel path unweeded, 
the neglect and desolation indicated that the 
owners for generations had found their solace 
elsewhere than in the culture of home. </p>

<p>The butterflies from the meadows at hand 
floated over, and left this sullen patch in the 
midst of the summer cloth of gold far behind 
them. The swallows did not descend to the 
eaves, for their nests had been thrust down 
with poles year after year till their affec- 
tionate clinging had at last been repulsed. </p>

<p>All the glory of the summer evening could 
not light up the meanness of the place. </p>

<p>A great passion renders the eyes of the 
imao-inative as unobservant as those who 
possess no imagination. Fellse did not see 
the scanty foliage which hardly prevented the 
sun from burning her cheek, the mean and 
flowerless garden, or the narrow and dis- 
coloured window. Her heart was occupied, 
and the sterile scene was nothing. Martial 
was there, and that was enough. </p>

<p>They were talking of things not in the 
least relevant to their thoughts, as is often 
the case when the world, if it could see, 
would smile and say, ' They are love- 
making." Deeds in no degree exhibit the 
real character, nor do words express the 
ideas in the inmost mind. Even the deepest 
lovers whose hearts are as one often talk 
quite apart from their thoughts. But Martial 
was not a lover. </p>

<p>"I like to see Shakespeare played," Martial 
was saying, * without any scenery or acces- 
sories." </p>

<p>Newspaper topics, the passing book, some
ii6
allusion to the theatre — these were the sub- 
jects they had discussed, as chance acquaint- 
ances discuss them. Felise happened to 
remark that she much wished to see Shake- 
speare on the stage. </p>

<p>"He is spoiled," said Martial, ' with rich 
dresses and diamond rings on the actresses" 
fingers, with gorgeous scenery, with the very 
accuracy of the imitation of his era. It is 
not Shakespeare — it is dress and glitter, and 
strut and mouthing; and you can never 
forget the advertisements which tell you you 
must admire it, it is so real, so lifelike. But 
that is just what makes it so unreal." </p>

<p>"Too mechanical," said Felise. </p>

<p>"Yes, that is it, too much machinery and 
upholstery — the spirit of the play buried 
under Turkey-pile carpets, smothered and 
lost. But if you can only see Shakespeare 
on bare planks, in a common room — a 
mere bare platform — and perhaps but badly 
lighted, and the players in their ordinary 
dresses, or but just distinguished with a
sword, or some emblem, and without any 
scenery at all, then, indeed, it is most beauti- 
ful." </p>

<p>"He is full of beautiful thoughts," she 
said. </p>

<p>'And then those beautiful thouo-hts come 
straight to you," he went on, ' and you feel 
them and think with them. It does not 
matter in the least if the actors are sfood or 
bad, indeed it does not want any acting at all 
— the words are enough; and as you listen, 
lo! the bare planks of the platform fade 
away, and the depth of the green forest 
comes, and you hear the sound of falling 
water, and the song of birds, and yonder are 
deer in the glade. Something goes right to 
your heart, and it is so real and so true that 
the tears rise in your eyes — for there is 
something sad in life always, and there is 
something sad in the very joyfulness of 
Shakespeare's songs. When they sing, 
" For love is crowned with the prime " — you 
remember " Between the acres of the rye " — </p>

<p>iiS
you can see the green corn and hear the 
nightingale, who sings while the corn is 
green. It is so beautiful, and yet it is 
so sad." </p>

<p>"I wish I could see it played like that." </p>

<p>* There are no actors then — Shakespeare 
plays to you," said Martial. ' He plays him- 
self, and speaks to you. It needs no actors. 
The best actors are in the way, they inter- 
fere; you see them and not Shakespeare. It 
is very wonderful, I cannot understand it, but 
there is that in Shakespeare which is not in 
any other book — something that makes things 
real, as when Juliet tears down the artificial 
green leaves and throws them to Romeo; the 
leaves are as real as real can be." </p>

<p>"I will try and hear the plays without good 
actors," said Felise. </p>

<p>"You can see the stars plainly when 
Jessica's lover speaks of them," went on 
Martial, excited with a favourite subject and 
all aglow with his fired imagination; ' you 
can see the heavens inlaid. You have seen
the sky, I am sure you have, thickly studded 
with stars, so close together that the point of 
a needle would scarcely go between them. 
Once now and then the sky is like this. 
When I hear the words spoken on the stage 
I can shut my eyes and see the sky white 
with these myriads of stars. Shakespeare was 
always out-of-doors, in the fields and woods, 
and on the hills — you may be certain that he 
was; some of his plays ought to be played in 
a green meadow. And the poems, they are 
hawthorn and June roses. But no one seems 
to care about them now — no one cares for
anything outside cities. In the sonnets ' </p>

<p>he stopped suddenly, and looked at his watch. 
' Mr. Godwin is a long time," in a different 
and ordinary tone of voice. </p>

<p>Martial had caught himself at his old ex- 
travagances, his old romancing, his old ideals 
coming up again, and beside a woman. This 
would not do. He would guard himself care- 
fully in future, and talk of anything but the 
ideal or imaginative. </p>

<p>All that Felise had once found in her 
solitary communings among the woods and far 
hills, now came to her in the tones of his 
voice. Yet she had scarcely heard the words 
he had uttered, and barely followed their 
meaning. She was thinking so deeply of 
the man, she could not think of what he 
said; she was silent for some time after he 
ceased. </p>

<p>Presently, remembering he was one of 
Cornleigh's largest tenants, she mentioned 
the case of old Abner, and asked if 
Martial would use his influence with the 
Squire. </p>

<p>"I have no influence," said Martial; ' I am 
very sorry. I can do nothing. Don't you 
know that farmers are despised } This Corn- 
leigh Cornleigh was once asked by a tenant 
to put down a plank-floor in his house, as he 
suffered from rheumatism, and the stone-floor 
was cold. The Squire said stone-floors were 
good enough for farmers." </p>

<p>"I have heard that Mrs. Cornleigh says
it is ridiculous farmers" daughters should be 
called " Miss.'" </p>

<p>"There is not the least chance for your 
aged cottager," said Martial. ' To the work- 
house he must go; it's good enough for him, 
you see. It is brutally cruel." </p>

<p>"Why are people so unfeeling .'*" said 
Felise. ' I cannot understand why they are 
so harsh." </p>

<p>"Perhaps it is a lack of perception," said 
Martial. ' They do not see the misery they 
are causing; they cannot put themselves in 
some one else's place. Has Mr. Goring been 
asked to sign the requisition and subscribe to 
the testimonial T
"Testimonial?" </p>

<p>"To Edward Cornleigh Cornleigh, Esq., 
lor his long and faithful service in Parlia 
ment. There is to be a grand demonstration 
to induce him to continue our representative. 
Everybody will go to Maasbury that day." </p>

<p>"Papa — I mean Mr. Goring— will not sub- 
scribe, I am sure." </p>

<p>Of trifles like these they talked while the 
sun declined, conversing not of what was in 
their thoughts, but making up little speeches 
addressed to the audience, as it were. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>

<p>ELISE was thinking: * How well 
he talks — what ideas he has! his 
voice is low, but it is deep and 
strong; his lips are well-shaped — I should 
like a kiss. That is a shabby old coat; }es, 
your coat is much worn, sir, but it suits you; 
you look a gentleman all the more, perhaps. 
How I should like to give you a new one! 
Who gave you that gold pin in your tie, I 
wonder — some woman? His ears are good; 
most men have ill-formed ears. His hair is 
very fine, like silk. I wonder what he is think- 
ing of — me — is he thinking of me at all? There 
is a small mole on his neck. Why doesn't 
he look at me — he has such fine eyes? Your
hands are not small, sir, nor are they white. 
I do not hke white hands; they look as if 
they could not do anything. Your hands are 
a little sun-browned, and they are not small 
and feeble; I think you could give anyone a 
hard knock, though you are not very big. 
Why don't you look at me? Look at me 
straight in the face, now do, there's a dear! 
I hope he is trustful, but why does he look 
away? — he looks anywhere rather than at 
me. Yes, you have a very good neck — that 
makes your head appear so good. Why do 
you want to hide your eyes? I wish my hair 
was just the same shade as his; how nice it 
must be to have hair that colour! His boots 
have been mended. Ah! it is hard times 
with him — wish I was sharino- them! His 
handkerchief wants darnino-. How dad I 
am I gave him his horse again! How angry 
papa will be when he finds out what I did! 
He is handsome — I wonder how many girls 
have flattered him! I dare say he is quite 
spoilt. Will he ever like me? He will not
look at mc; I will contradict him presently, 
then perhaps he will." </p>

<p>Martial was thinking: ' How fortunate I 
exhausted all my romance before I met her! 
There is no knowing to what lengths I 
should have gone; but luckily all those ex- 
travagances are gone by. These are very 
common old Windsor chairs. I don't believe 
our miserly steward has a respectable chair 
in his dog-kennel, i.e. his house — wretched 
hard old chairs; but how gracefully she rests 
herself in hers! Her body seems to poise 
on itself and repose without the chair, as if 
the chair was merely put there to content the 
eye of the spectator; she rests like an Im- 
mortal on the ether. Really she does do 
things nicely — to see her walk, it is a picture. 
I think she sighs now and then. I believe 
she breathed more deeply just then; of 
course she does that because it makes her 
bust swell and fall more. Oh yes, the 
cunning of these women is something beyond 
the power of man to circumvent. Breathe
as deeply as you like, it is no use. I am 
case-hardened. I have been through all 
these experiences — old birds and chaff, you 
have heard. Very beautiful no doubt, but 
still a woman. Very interesting indeed. I 
know more than you think. What a lovely 
shoulder she has beneath that dress — I shall 
never forget it. You don't know what a 
view I had when you were bathing. And 
her hair reaches down to her knee, very 
nearly; thick, too, wavy and fine. But that 
is nothing to her shape and her knee — there, 
she has just moved her knee. I can see it 
quite plainly through the dress as I saw it 
then, white and dewy from the water. She 
makes believe to listen to everything I say — 
just as if she cared, just as if she liked what 
I say about things. What a stupid I am to 
talk to her of anything beside a bonnet! I 
can feel she keeps looking at me; very likely 
she wants to try another glance on me — long 
and passionate. No, no, nothing of the kind; 
I won't permit you. I will keep my eyes on
the grass or the trees as firm as possible. In 
the sonnets there is a line — pooh! I will not 
remember such folly. I wish she would move 
a little farther away. I can feel her sitting 
near me. I don't like this — when's Godwin 
coming? I must get out of it. Her shoulder 
and her neck, and her white knee — her dress 
is quite transparent to me. I never could 
have thought there was anyone so lovely 
in the world. Now her hand — there it is 
drooping; it is not only white, it is lit up 
within with some delicious light — some clear- 
ness, as if it was the dawn under the skin. 
There, she has raised her hand; she rests 
her head against it a moment. Now see, it 
is not transparent like that of anyone very 
ill; it is plump, but it is alight, aglow, — the 
dawn is inside it. She is Greek, and yet she 
is not; she is English-Greek ; the mingling 
of the styles of the antique and the English 
produces the greatest beauty. She feels 
delicious to sit by; something seems to in- 
fluence me; it is extraordinarily pleasant
sitting by her. There is something dreamy 
in it, as if she were Cytherea. Here, what 
am I at! Romancing. She's only a woman. 
However, I need not worry myself about 
occasional lapses. I am hardened enough, in 
all conscience. This sort of creature is very 
well as a Picture; you don't want to get 
excited over it. She looked straight at me 
then. No, I am not going to look at you — 
much too cold for that. Must say something, 
I suppose. Now I have sat by her once, I 
could do so every day without the least 
dano-er. There, the sunlight has touched 
her hair ' </p>

<p>Aloud he said: ' The sun is still very warm, 
although sinking." </p>

<p>"The warm weather is welcome to you, I 
suppose; it is good for your wheat, is it not ?" 
she replied. </p>

<p>"Yes, it is; still it is not much use. It is 
too late — or seems so. Any weather is good 
enough for a despised farmer." </p>

<p>"I do not see why they should be de- 
spised." </p>

<p>"I am weary of it/ said Martial, suddenly 
throwing off his air of studied indifference. 
' We o-o on — at least I do — from hand to 
mouth, year after year; it is a most un- 
pleasant position. We are permitted to exist 
— on charity. As a great favour, out of his 
gracious benevolence our landlord presents 
us with ten per cent. — as a present, not as 
our right. I think I shall get out of it. I 
am very much inclined to sell off and go to 
the States ' </p>

<p>"The States!" repeated Felise in a low 
voice, shocked and alarmed. </p>

<p>"Yes, I think so. This system of touch- 
the-hat is too much for me. Certainly the 
farmers are very much to blame; it is 
perfectly sickening to see their servility, all 
praising and be-lauding and applauding the 
very men they hate. There is nothing sturdy 
or independent about the British farmer of 
our day — truckling to the landlord, and 
truckling to the steward, and truckling to the 
solicitor, and truckling to the parson; it is
most contemptible. If they had had the 
courage to say what they thought, and if 
they had had the common-sense to combine 
together, they could have done whatever 
they chose. But as for combination, they 
are incapable of it. Now it is too late." 
' Why too late T
* The labourers — your old cottager, for 
instance — are going to have votes, and in 
future the country, I mean the rural districts, 
will be in their hands. The farmers as a 
governing class will disappear." </p>

<p>"Then old Abner will be able to stay in 
his cottage," said Felise, naturally jumping to 
a conclusion. </p>

<p>* Events will not move quick enough to 
serve him, I fear," said Martial. ' His wrong 
is but one among so many. What rouses my 
indignation is the complacent assertion that 
there is really nothing wrong. So much 
philanthropy, and so many reforms in work- 
houses and prisons, and in the laws, they 
say, have removed everything cruel and harsh. </p>

<p>while I believe it is just the reverse; I 
beHeve there is just as much cruelty and 
harshness in the workhouses and prisons and 
infirmaries—in the whole system — as ever 
there was. Really, I do think that the more 
philanthropy is talked about, and especially 
scientific philanthropy, the more individual 
suffering there is. It is all so vague. They 
give thousands to hospitals — not a penny to 
a poor man. Cornleigh Cornleigh would 
subscribe a hundred pounds to a new hospital, 
but he would not permit your aged cottager 
to stay in his home — nothing of the sort; 
drive him to the workhouse. There is 
nothing so cold-hearted as philanthropy." </p>

<p>"You mean it is all given to the buildings, 
and not to the sufferers." </p>

<p>* That is it; but I am afraid the sun is too 
warm for you." The sunset-glow now came 
full upon Felise's face. </p>

<p>"No, not at all. Besides, I have my sun- 
shade." </p>

<p>She had her sunshade, indeed, and had
thrown it carelessly over her shoulder, so that 
if the sun had been shining at her back it 
would have protected her; but the rays came 
from the right hand — across Martial — so that 
the parasol was useless in the position she 
had it. If she had shaded herself from the 
sun she could not have seen him, as the 
parasol would intervene — that was the reason 
of her apparent carelessness. </p>

<p>The door of the house creaked, and Robert 
Godwin came out; they rose and met him. 
He said that he should not require Martial's 
services further that evening— would he come 
the day after next? Martial agreed, and 
went to fetch Ruy from the stable. Both of 
them accompanied Felise some way towards 
her home, then wished her 'good- evening," 
and parted. </p>

<p>The same scene occurred on the next oc- </p>

<p>asion of Barnard's visit to Godwin; Martial
and Felise sat in the scanty shade of the
poplars on the white-green lawn, thinking of
one thing, and talking of another. </p>

<p>I
That the altered position of their affairs 
might be thrown into relief, it seemed best 
to delineate the circumstances first before 
explaining them; just as actors come on the 
stage and begin to tell their story afterwards. 
Robert Godwin had contrived this, and every 
other evening Felise and Martial, in the 
shade of the tall poplar, sat on his lawn, 
idle, side by side, till the glow of the sunset 
touched her cheek. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2>

<p>F our old habits are suspended, how 
rapidly the touch of living hands 
disappears from our inanimate sur- 
roundings. Almost the instant the living 
hand is withdrawn, dust settles on the fur- 
niture and the room. </p>

<p>Dust thickens in the ink; the pen corrodes; 
papers become gritty; the moisture of the air 
or the heat of the sun curls photographs; 
desolation dwells in every nook and corner. </p>

<p>The smooth surface of the polished table 
is strewn with the fine particles deposited by 
the atmosphere; it is sown with dust. Time 
so soon asserts his reign. But a day or two 
is sufficient; the (lowers left in the vase
wither, and the air becomes dull and lifeless 
let but the door be closed for three days. </p>

<p>When I return to my chamber and find 
it thus, I hasten to push the books aslant 
from the positions in which they have been 
lying, to upset some of the papers and 
give them a new aspect, to Hick the dust 
from the table, to open the window. The 
change is instant; immediately the chairs 
appear comfortable, and the room a habitation 
for the living. Yet it is sorrowful to reflect 
how soon — but a day or two — and already 
the dust has gathered over the place we filled. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin was sitting at his desk 
in his bedroom — his desk you will remember 
was the washstand, and stood by the narrow 
window. Half the embrasure of the window 
— deep in the thick wall — was lit by the 
slant rays of the evening sun. Cobwebs had 
grown in the corner of the casement, and 
stretched out over the piles of papers. </p>

<p>They were gritty with dust; they had 
not been touched lately. Dust was thicken- </p>



<p>ing the ink; the pen was corroding ; fragments 
of a torn-up envelope lay on the floor. He 
sat there^ but the desk and the window 
were full of desolation. Old habits were 
suspended; the touch of the living hand 
was withdrawn. The pen was not dipped in 
the ink, the papers remained unmoved, and 
dust collected in the folds, and spiders spun 
threads about them. </p>

<p>He sat with his left arm on the wash- 
stand in such a position that he could see 
what was doing in the garden underneath. 
He was watching Felise and Martial, whom 
he had himself set there to be watched. </p>

<p>The slow sun scarcely moved in the western 
sky, and the lines of shade cast by the 
bars of the casement dragged upwards. 
Flies buzzed against the pane — buzzed and 
crawled and buzzed again — the only sound in 
the still room. </p>

<p>Fixed and intent upon the pair in the 
shade of the grey poplar-tree, Robert Godwin 
sat and watched and watched, and held this
thing up close and closer to his mind to see 
and understand it. </p>

<p>He had worked it out in this way: so 
soon as Felise had purchased Ruy she 
ceased to walk over; that was reasonable 
enough, because there was nothing to attract 
her. But what had become of the horse? 
She did not ride him, and Godwin could 
not hear that it was at Mr. Gorinor's. There 
were plenty to bring him information, for 
although they hated him they hastened to 
serve his will. </p>

<p>This is man. Not man as he would be 
if his aspirations were encouraged instead 
of being beaten out of him, but man as 
he exists on sufferance, the slave-man. His 
meanest and basest parts are encouraged, his 
servility rewarded, his treachery accounted 
a merit. This is the slave-man. </p>

<p>No tyrant, however evil, has yet lacked 
ready hands to execute his most abominable 
will. To read how eagerly men have rushed 
to serve the despot is the bitterest, the saddest
matter of history; it is the saddest sight 
in our own day. </p>

<p>Godwin had mean tools enough ready 
to serve him with hand or tongue; yet 
he never paid them. They received no 
reward, to serve him was its own reward — to 
such a depth of degradation does the slave- 
man descend. </p>

<p>These miserable village wretches, from 
whom this despot took away the spring, 
from whom he had tried to take their 
common, over whom he had domineered so 
long, were only too proud and glad if they 
could do him some mean service. He paid 
his labourers the lowest of all the farmers, 
yet he never wanted for ploughman or 
carter. They would work for him sixpence 
cheaper than for any other, and overtime 
for nothing; they would submit to be driven 
and hectored; they clung to his employment 
as a glad thing. </p>

<p>The meanness of man — slave- man — is in- 
expressible. Some, I verily believe, delight
to be slave-men; it is a joy to them, and 
they would not change their condition; not 
only miserable village wretches, but men 
in good position, well-to-do sycophants. </p>

<p>Godwin had but to ask once if Ruy was 
at Mr. Goring's, and several tongues informed 
him that the horse had never been there. </p>

<p>Three or four days afterwards he met 
Martial on Ruy. Neither of them said 
anything about the horse — Martial, because 
he knew the man well, and that he would 
not give him any information; Robert, for 
several reasons. </p>

<p>With the clue in his hands, and behind 
the scenes, Godwin easily understood how 
Ruy had passed back into Martial's posses- 
sion. </p>

<p>Felise had bought the horse to give him to 
her lover. </p>

<p>She had come over morning after morning 
to feed the bay with apples because she 
loved his original owner. She stroked his 
neck — it was as if she had stroked Martial's
I40
head; she spoke to him gently as if she 
caressed her lover; she walked beside him, 
and reluctantly left him at the stall. </p>

<p>She was poor, yet she had got seventy 
pounds together to return her lover his 
favourite. </p>

<p>This thing then had been in her mind 
that sleepless night when he delved by the 
lantern, when after nine years hope began 
to shine like a sunrise upon him. </p>

<p>This was in her mind as she stood at his 
side, when he felt the touch of her dress, and 
inhaled the sweetness of her breath. While 
the sunrise of hope shone upon him, her 
heart was given to another; given, too, in 
the boldest, the most open manner — a manner 
at which the world would make mock and 
mouthing as beyond a modest affection. </p>

<p>The lash was laid upon his naked heart; it 
cut deeply, but he made no sign. </p>

<p>It would have been easy for him to set 
mischief afoot; he had no doubt Felise had 
kept her uncle in ignorance of what she had
done. But he said nothing; he watched and 
waited. </p>

<p>He held a secret with Fehse; this was a 
strong position. In a measure she was in 
his power. </p>

<p>He would not play into her hands and let 
another man — let Martial know that she had 
done this for love of him. </p>

<p>Would any woman now have let another 
woman know that a man had in secret gone 
to some great length for her? </p>

<p>The solace of his hands was lost; no occu- 
pation could numb the biting of the sharp 
pain within. From his workmen he sud- 
denly snatched their tools, and beat his heart 
as it were against solid stone and timber. 
From the stone-breaker in the yard he seized 
his hammer and broke the very stones — the 
hard Hints — shattering them as if the blow 
destroyed the nerve. He used the saw and 
the axe; he stooped and put his shoulder to 
the heavy beams and trunks of timber; with 
vehement energy he strove to overcome. </p>



<p>There were always works in progress upon 
the estate; he visited them, and threw his 
body against the weight and inertia of dull 
matter. It availed nothing; the pain was 
not to be beaten out. </p>

<p>One thing only he could not do now — he 
could not write. The pen was laid aside, and 
the dust thickened in the ink, and rendered 
the papers gritty. </p>

<p>The carpenter can plane and hammer, and 
the mason can use his trowel; the blacksmith 
can swing his sledge and whistle at his bel- 
lows; the ploughman can follow his plough 
though the load of sorrow be at his heart, 
and the grief, never to be wholly healed, 
remain open. But to write — who can write? 
The spectre rises between the mind and the 
paper; letters may be traced, but meaning 
flies before it can be transcribed. </p>

<p>There is no labour so heavy as writing 
when the heart is cruelly hurt. </p>

<p>He could not do it; nothing else was 
r-.!Cted, but letters accumulated and piles
of accounts lay as they were thrown in the 
ledge of the window. </p>

<p>So long as he had Felise to himself, so 
long he had endured. For, in a sense, he 
had had her to himself
Dwelling upon her the whole day through, 
and day after day, month after month, for 
nine years, she had come to be his own. 
Bitter as his thought was, he had poured it 
all out upon her — he had surrounded her 
with his feelings; she was unconscious of it, 
but it was the same to him as if she had 
known. Round her he had thrown a circle 
of his bitterness — an invisible ring; enclosed 
in that circle she was inaccessible to him, but 
no one else had her. </p>

<p>She no longer walked alone. </p>

<p>Upon a ledge high up an inaccessible cliff 
there was a great treasure of gold. A man 
saw it — it was his discovery; but he was 
not strong enough to climb to it. He 
passed beneath every day and looked at 
it. In time another man came, stronge or
cleverer than he, who climbed up and seized 
the treasure. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had discovered this woman 
in her girlhood. He could not obtain her; 
he had watched her growth; then came 
another and bore her away. </p>

<p>The cruelty to Rosa of Felise's existence 
was surpassed by the cruelty to Godwin of 
Martial's existence. Godwin had done him 
no wrong; he received this terrible blow. </p>

<p>As Felise had been to Rosa, so was 
Martial to Godwin. The dramatist renders 
all his characters happy; human life leaves 
half at least in sorrow. </p>

<p>There was no solace in his hands, nor in 
riding to and fro, nor in aught that he could 
do. His candle burned through the night, 
for he could not sleep; but he did not seek 
to pass the hours in working with his hands. 
The hours passed; that was all. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2>

<p>REFLEX action caused by the 
continual concentration and self- 
suppression had made Robert 
Godwin bitter towards those whom he should 
have cultivated. He rendered himself odious 
of set purpose in the sight of the woman he 
loved. The same reflex action now led him 
on to desire the strancrest of strange things. 
He desired to see with his own eyes the love 
that passed between Felise and Martial. </p>

<p>Can there be anything more bitter than 
the view of happiness to the miserable? To 
the hungry to watch the banquet, to the 
thirsty to see the spring, to the sleepless to 
watch the slumberer; but these are little
indeed to the torture of the jealous. The 
kiss that thrills the heart of the one, sears 
the senses of the other, as though molten 
iron had flowed in its sweet dew. </p>

<p>This was the molten iron that Robert 
Godwin proposed to pour over his naked 
heart. </p>

<p>Reflex action of the mind was taking him 
backwards along the path, setting his steps 
opposite to the goal; leading him to a 
darkness and a terror. </p>

<p>He contrived it: he fastened himself to 
the leathern bed of torture; he turned the 
screws; he stretched the sinews of his limbs 
upon the rack; while his spectre — his double 
— watched the writhinQr of the victim — of 
himself. </p>

<p>Why are these miserable things? Why 
cannot we be happy? Why is it so rare ? 
There are some who consider a certain 
amount of pain and misery as part and parcel 
of the very scheme of existence; they find 
some considerable pleasure in observing tor- </p>

<p>ture, for they see in every pang a confirmation 
of their favourite belief; how pleasant it is to 
find ourselves in the right! So, no doubt, the 
Inquisitors watched the flare of the faggots 
and the agony of the wretch at the stake; 
his sufferings confirmed their faith; they 
went home well satisfied, having carried out 
the scheme of the universe, which ordains 
that there must be pain. </p>

<p>Godwin tortured himself without conscious 
knowledge of what he was doing: he was 
driven along — a force had fastened on him 
and urged him. </p>

<p>There had been somethins: mooted about 
an average being taken of the wheat-crop on 
the Cornleigh estate; the idea had been 
started by some scientific agriculturist who 
thought that such statistics would ' be of the 
utmost value." Such is the invariable phrase 
— 'of the utmost value." Godwin had begun 
to work out this averagfe from returns fur- 
nished to him by the various tenants, and 
one day he went to the Manor House and
asked Martial to assist him. Barnard dis- 
liked the steward; still he was the steward, 
and the request was civilly put. He con- 
sented, and it was arranged that he should 
come to Godwin's every other afternoon, and 
spend two hours or so upon the papers. </p>

<p>Next Godwin ordered his sister, who 
never inquired into his objects, much less 
disputed his will, to go and beg Miss Goring 
to call upon them, * as Ruy was there again." </p>

<p>Felise was naturally extremely surprised, 
and could not imagine how this had happened. 
She was easily entrapped into going, and 
found not only Ruy, but Martial. Godwin 
proposed that they should stroll round the 
garden; seats had been placed for them. By- 
and-by he begged them to rest; he would 
rejoin them in ten minutes. They sat down 
— he went to his window. Ten minutes 
reached on to half-an-hour; on again, and an 
hour had passed before he returned. </p>

<p>Any trap is good enough for birds that 
desire to be caught. Felise was only too
eager; Martial not unwilling. What had 
happened once happened again and again — 
it is unnecessary to recount the little cir- 
cumstances which attended each particular 
meeting. That no pretext might be wanting, 
Godwin, who had caused the lawn to be 
mown after so many years" neglect, actually 
furnished it with tennis. Evening after 
evening they played and rested, played and 
rested before him. </p>

<p>From his window behind the accumulated 
papers, with his left arm on the washstand, 
he watched the scene in the garden, He 
could not hear what they said; he had no 
doubt they conversed of their love. He 
stretched himself on the leathern bed of 
torture; he turned the screws and tore him- 
self on the rack. He Hoated over his own 
misery. </p>

<p>Two facts by degrees became impressed 
upon his mind: the first was that Felise 
was the lover; Felise was courting, not 
courted; Felise was the passionate one. </p>

<p>I50
Martial received her love rather than sought 
it; she pressed herself upon him ; he quietly 
accepted without enthusiasm. Sometimes 
Godwin asked himself if Martial loved at
all. </p>

<p>To the struggling man, labouring for mere 
subsistence, can there be greater provocation 
than to hear of another already well to do 
receiving a large legacy of no value to him? </p>

<p>Martial did not care for her, did not value 
her; yet he had her — for nothing. </p>

<p>Godwin, who would have given his life for 
her, was despised. </p>

<p>The question occurred to him by-and-by, 
did Martial in reality know who had re- 
turned him the horse? Was that why he 
had never mentioned the subject, or made 
inquiries? it looked like previous knowledge. </p>

<p>Godwin snorted at the meanness of the 
man who could knowingly permit a penniless 
girl to go to so great a sacrifice on his 
behalf. </p>

<p>Martial took the gift of Ruy as a matter
of course; he had FeHse at his beck and 
call — a mere mistress to him. </p>

<p>For step by step, Robert Godwin studying 
these two — holding them up close and closer 
to his mental vision as those with weak sio-ht 
hold up objects to their eyes — step by step, 
thought by thought came at last to believe 
that Martial's indifference could only arise 
from possession. How else could he be 
indifferent to such beauty } How else except 
he was cloyed? </p>

<p>She was Martial's mistress — his willing 
mistress. This was the secret, and explained 
all. </p>

<p>Many observed in these days that Robert 
Godwin, as he rode through the town, was 
black in the face, as if an invisible hand 
griped him by the throat and choked him. 
They said he was apoplectic; yet apopletic 
people were purple, but Godwin's face was 
black. * He looks like a black ram," said the 
shepherd in the fold. </p>

<p>The evening sun shone upon the whitish- </p>

<p>J52
green lawn, the tall grey poplar cast its 
narrow shadow, the angular scanty house 
stood gaunt and unsupported. Not all the 
glory of the summer could illumine the 
meanness, the scantiness, the harshness of 
the leafless place. </p>

<p>Dust thickened in the ink, dust thickened 
among the folds of the papers in the window- 
ledge, dust strewed the desk except where 
Robert Godwin's left arm rested. </p>

<p>One thing leads to another. It was 
natural that Martial should walk a little way 
home with Felise; it was an easy step to 
go as far as the wicket-gate; easy to meet 
Mr. Goring; not difficult to enter. But 
a short time elapsed before Martial was a 
frequent guest at Beechknoll, He did not 
conceal his opinions, and Mr. Goring found 
them in a great measure to coincide with 
his own. He knew a great deal about 
botany; Mr. Goring was a gardener for his 
own amusement — a grower of trees and 
of flowers. Besides, Felise's will was law
and government; her uncle could not have 
thwarted her In anything. </p>

<p>Seeing this, Robert Godwin abandoned 
the statistics under pretence that the materials 
were Incomplete, and released Martial froni 
his attendance. Instead of meeting at 
Godwin's, they met at Felise's home still 
more frequently, with still less restraint, with 
far more opportunities. Robert Godwin 
knew that they sat among the flowers, and 
by the sundial — that they strolled in the 
copse by the trout-pond; the sweet dew 
of their kisses was as molten iron on his 
lips. </p>

<p>He knew these thincrs as he sat at his 
window, gazing down upon the now vacant 
lawn. What they talked of, what they 
did, the close embrace too ardent for words — 
he knew all; in his mind he saw all gazing 
from his window. </p>

<p>The narrow shadow of the poplar faded 
as the sun went down into the dusk of 
night. His candle burned on till the dawn. </p>



<p>He must have slept at times, but he did 
not know it. </p>

<p>At last, in the midst of the night Robert 
Godwin found some work for his hands 
to do. In the attic where he had arranged 
and sorted the lumber, the two old flintlock 
pistols he had turned up were lying on an 
oaken press, as he had left them. With 
sand he rubbed away the rust from the 
barrels — there was not much, for they had 
been in a dry place — with oil he loosened the 
locks. In the road by daylight he found 
splinters of flint, and fitted them to the 
weapons. As he tried the trigger the sparks 
flew; had there been powder in the pans 
it would have exploded. </p>

<p>They were ordinary pistols, such as people 
commonly carried when they drove on a 
journey in the days before railways — in 
the beginning of the century. They were 
in perfect preservation, and would send a 
ball almost as true as ever. They were
the only firearms in the house, for he had 
never been a sportsman. </p>

<p>In the midst of the night Robert Godwin 
polished and scoured them, oiled the locks, 
and fitted the flints. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>

<p>N August the loveliest day is when 
the thunder booms far off at sea, 
while over the cornfields the sun 
shines with increased brilliance. The sky 
over the wheat is blue, but in the distance 
some large clouds stay motionless. The 
upper slopes of these mount-like vapours 
reflect the rays of the sun, beneath they melt 
away in an indefinite mist which does not 
throw back the light. The massy ridges 
above have no foundation beneath reaching 
to the horizon; they do not threaten ; they 
add to the beauty of the level azure, as 
hills about a plain. </p>

<p>Rolling in from the south comes, the wave
of heavy soLind, too distant to cause uneasi- 
ness — the boom of an immense breaker on 
the shore of heaven. After each burst the 
sun seems to glow fiercer, the warm haze 
thickens, the rich blue sky is richer, the insects 
in the air vibrate their wings more rapidly, 
and a shriller hum arises; butterflies are 
busier, and in the wheat the reapers bend, 
cutting at the yellow straw. </p>

<p>Instead of uneasiness the thunder increases 
the sense of luxurious, tropical sunlight, 
colour, and glowing life. All things appear 
aware that the lightning will not approach — 
it will remain miles at sea — and they throb 
and pant with pulses quickened by the 
discharge of electricity. </p>

<p>The lovers were sitting on a green dry 
bank near the sundial, in the shade of a beech. 
Round spots of sunlight came through its 
branches and dotted the grass at their feet. 
Behind them there was a belt of beeches, 
on the right hand a thick and high yew-hedge, 
on the left a great thicket of hawthorn trees; </p>



<p>so that they were enclosed on three sides, 
but in front the view was open. A square 
of green sward, raised Hke a terrace, was 
before them; at its edge the ground dropped 
a few feet, and the meadows commenced. 
Far down their slope the brook passed, and 
beyond it were the cornfields, undulating 
away to the hills. </p>

<p>Meadow and brook, wheatfields and hills — 
a simple landscape, yet such as is not to be 
surpassed by any on the earth. A common 
landscape — there are hundreds such in our 
England — yet beyond compare. There are 
none like it elsewhere in the wide world. </p>

<p>This green raised platform, like a deck, 
was the only spot at Beechknoll where a view 
could be obtained without ascending the 
steep coombeside by the copse. Mr. Goring 
had planted himself so round about with 
trees that nothing could be seen beyond 
them except in this one place. He had 
placed a trunk of oak, prepared as a seat, 
near the sundial under a sycamore by the
yew-hedge, but the lovers to-day preferred 
the dry green bank. </p>

<p>Beyond the brook in the rising field 
reapers were labouring at the wheat; afar off 
the yellow slopes were scarce distinguishable 
in the August haze. It was one of those 
loveliest of August mornings when the idle 
thunder booms at sea. </p>

<p>Felise had dreamed here so many, many 
times in the past, it was natural she should 
bring h'm here. Nominally they were ex- 
amining a broad portfolio of etchings; in 
truth they were purely idle. </p>

<p>The reapers were working hard in the dry, 
hot wheat, the straw warm to the touch, the 
earth warm beneath and opening in crevices 
with heat; a dry rustling of straw ; a dry 
impalpable dust filling their throats. The 
days are long in August, but never long 
enough for the reapers. </p>

<p>On the greenish face of the sundial, 
weather-stained and tarnished, the shadow of 
the gnomon seemed to rest, so slowly the
i6o
sun moved on his high summer circle. Love 
and Time were idle, but the reapers toiled in 
the corn. </p>

<p>Red berries and pink flowers were on the 
sprays of the brambles that thrust forth from 
the thicket of hawthorn. There were nuts 
on the hazel-rods among the hawthorns, 
and along the edge of the grass disks of 
knapweed, and yellow bedstraw, and purple 
vetch. Where the terrace sloped to the 
meadow two or three harebells drooped; the 
light air scarcely swung them. </p>

<p>Butterflies, whose blue wings were edged 
with another blue, came up the terrace, and 
fluttered along its verge. Bees visited the 
clover still flowering in the long grass. In 
the air, invisible, many thousand insect-wings 
vibrating: beat it to a continuous hum. </p>

<p>The light feet of squirrels in the beeches 
and among the ferns and moss scarcely made 
a rustle, unless they moved a dry leaf; the 
rushing of the water over the hatch at the 
trout-pond farther away now lifted itself and
now decreased, the sound floated among the 
tree-trunks. As the dry, warm air came from 
the corn, the round dots of sunHght shot to and 
fro on the sward, following the leaves above. </p>

<p>A fervour of heat and light glowed in the 
atmosphere and was caught and held in the 
haze. Over the beech-tree the blue shone with 
light. Rolling along, the boom from the sea 
passed like a great organ-note, and the earth 
and air, the grass and living things re- 
sponded; the light was yet more brilliant, 
the colours yet more warm; the earth offered 
the fulness of the harvest. </p>

<p>Two lovers, but one only loving. Martial 
had yielded and slumbered at the feet of 
love, yet he did not love. As the vehement 
August heat causes a slumberous feeling, so 
the vehement passion of Felise overthrew 
him, and his nature slumbered at her feet. 
He was there, and yet he was not hers. </p>

<p>Felise made no inquiry. It was enough 
that he was there; she wanted him, she did 
not ask if he needed her. All she required
i62
was that he should be where she could give 
herself to him. </p>

<p>For she had given herself to him from the 
depth of her soul. With tenfold quickened 
perceptions she saw the beauty of the earth, 
and with that beauty she loved. </p>

<p>She saw the clear definition of the trees, 
their colour, and the fineness of the extended 
branches — she was aware of the delicate 
leaves; she saw the hues of the wheat, 
shading from pale yellow to ruddy gold; her 
senses were alive to the minutest difference 
of tint or sound; to the rustle of the squirrel 
touching the dry leaf, the rush of the falling 
water, the hum of the insect-wing; keen to the 
difference of motion, the gliding of the dots 
of sunlight on the sward, the broad flutter of 
the peacock-butterfly, the quick vibration of 
the wasp-fly's vane. Her exalted passion 
strung her naturally fine and sensitive 
nature; she seemed to feel the sun's majestic 
onward sweep in the deep azure — her love 
made earth divine. </p>

<p>Sometimes under the power of sweet music 
from an organ — sweet, yet deep and noble — 
there wakes up within the heart another con- 
sciousness, till we seem capable of perceiving 
more than is usually apparent to the senses. 
Invisible things are shadowed forth and stand 
in the air. </p>

<p>Tenfold more so her heart, listening to the 
music of its own passion, was able to perceive 
the deeper knowledge shut and closed except 
to love. This was inwardly; outwardly she 
saw hitherto unknown crlories in the litrht 
and beauty of the day, an art divine in these 
thincTs, </p>

<p>There came the low boom of the distant 
thunder; but the hills slumbered, and the 
clouds were still. The reapers laboured in 
the corn. </p>

<p>All the unwritten and inexpressible aspira- 
tions of her nature, her noble nature, crowded 
into this one emotion. In her love was her 
all, her existence, her breath, her thought, 
the very expression of her form; as a flower
.-^o — 2
grows and bears its one colour and perfume, 
so she lived and bore this one feeling. Of 
all else, of the world and of herself, she was 
utterly careless and unconcerned. </p>

<p>So great was her joy in her love, it seemed 
the width of the dome of the sky was not 
wide enough to express it. </p>

<p>Upon the green and tarnished face of the 
ancient sundial there was written in worn 
letters, Nihil nisi mnbra — Nothing without 
shadow; no, not even love. The fervour of 
passion must needs cast the deepest shadow 
beside it. Let us welcome the shadow if 
only we can have the sunlight of love. </p>

<p>Through Martial's mind, as he reclined 
beside her, there passed images of ancient 
Greece — of the ideal of human beauty ex- 
pressed in marble as Aphrodite sought the 
bath, expressed in words resounding to this 
day. The idea of perfect human beauty — 
the idea of shape and curve and motion — 
Hows through all their works, even those of 
pure thought, as Plato's. Without direct
mention or description, still the idea is there. 
These images passed through Martial's mind 
— this beauty was hers. In life, in flesh and 
blood, and actual reality, the ideal was there 
with him. He worshipped her beauty, and 
said to himself, ' I do not love." </p>

<p>Her soul pursued his. She felt as if his 
man's intellect gave a godlike meaning to 
the beauty of the sunlight and of the earth. 
In the expanse of loveliness through which 
she had wandered dreaming for years — 
through wood and mead, by stream and hill 
and wide sea — she had found the central 
figure, that which made all things plain and 
completed them. </p>

<p>Till he came the fields, the woods, the 
hills, the broad sea were incomplete; to all 
he gave a meaning. She endowed him with 
all that she perceived in the glory and mystery 
around her by day and by night. </p>

<p>Of old time the shadow of the gnomon 
glided over marble; sometimes they built great 
structures to show the passage of the shadow
more distinctly — observatories of shadow. 
Not only on this round horizontal disk of 
greenish metal, not only on those ancient 
marble slabs, but over the whole earth the 
shadow advances, for the earth is the gnomon 
of night. The sunlight and the night, year 
by year, century by century, cycle by cycle; 
how long is it? Can anyone say ? So long 
has love, too, endured, passing on and handed 
down from heart to heart. </p>

<p>The long Roll of Love reaching back 
into the profoundest abyss of Time, upon it 
fresh names are written day by day. </p>

<p>Felise's love was pure indeed; yet what is 
there that the purest love is not capable of 
for the one to whom the soul is devoted? </p>

<p>Self-immolation, self-sacrifice, death — is 
there anything love refuses? </p>

<p>Still the shadow slips on the green rust of 
the dial. Let even life pass from us if only 
we can have love. </p>

<p>Felise saw the beauty of the earth, and 
with that beauty she loved; the cool green
flags in the meadow-brook; the reeds which 
moved forward and advanced as if about to 
step forth from the water as they swayed; 
the deep blue of the sky; the ruddy gold of 
the wheat under the pale yellow haze. </p>

<p>The rolling boom of the thunder came 
through the fields of light, the earth glowed 
warmer. </p>

<p>That the wonderful mechanism of the 
mind, the heart, of life, should be capable of 
emotion so divine, and yet should so soon 
perish— is it not unutterably cruel? </p>

<p>So many, and so many, who have loved in 
the long passage of time, but are gone as the 
shadow goes from the dial when the sun 
sinks. Are, then, our noblest feelings to fade 
and become void? </p>

<p>Upon the sundial there were curious graven 
circles and interwoven angles, remnants of 
the ancient lore which saw fate in the stars 
and read things above nature in nature. 
Symbols and signs are still needed, for the 
earth and life are still mysterious; they can- </p>



<p>not be written, they require the inarticulate 
sign of the magician. </p>

<p>Let us not outlive love in our days, and 
come to look back with sorrow on those 
times. </p>

<p>You have seen the ships upon the sea; 
they sail hither and thither thousands of 
miles. Do they find aught equal to love? 
Can they bring back precious gems to rival 
it from the rich south? </p>

<p>The reapers have been in the corn these 
thousand years, the miners in the earth, the 
toilers in the city; in all the labour and long- 
suffering is there anything like unto love? 
Any reward or profit in the ships, the mines, 
the warehouses? </p>

<p>What are the institutions of man, the 
tawdry state, the false law, the subsidized 
superstition, and poor morality, that pale 
shadow of truth — what are these by love? </p>

<p>Could but love stay, could but love have 
its will, and no more would be needed for 
eternity. </p>

<p>Overcome with her beauty, he was at her 
feet as at the feet of an immortal, such 
as moved among the violets in the early 
days. </p>

<p>Her dress was transparent to his eyes — 
the image of the beautiful knees dewy from 
the bath could never fade. No dress could 
hide her. He slumbered in worship at her 
knees. </p>

<p>The reapers laboured cutting at the wheat, 
and with bowed backs bound up the sheaves; 
the doves came out from the copse and 
fed among the stubble. Among the beech- 
trees there floated the sound of the fallinof 
water on its way to the cool green flags 
of the brook. Faint rustling of squirrels" feet, 
the hum of invisible insects, the flutter of 
butterflies" wings, the hum of a humble bee 
wandering among the fern, the call of the 
grasshoppers in the grass, the amorous sigh 
of the breeze, the quick maze of the sunlight 
dots, the sense of all summer things, the 
distant thunder deepening with the pressure
lyo
of its note the voices of the sunlit earth, 
the fulness of the harvest, the touch of a 
loving hand. </p>

<p>His head rested upon her left knee — not 
on her lap, but on her left knee. His weight 
had been there so long it had compressed 
a vein, and her limb was growing numb. 
What of that? if the limb had been dying 
she would not have moved, she would not 
have changed her position one iota. She 
was sitting higher on the bank than he was, 
so that his head naturally rested there. 
He remembered the white knee dewy from 
the water; it was on that he really rested. 
Her arms like a bower hung over embracing; 
he looked up, he saw her loving eyes; her 
lips descended upon his. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2>

<p>HE happiest lady in the land is 
the lady who can sing like the 
adorable Patti. The construction 
of this sentence is not harmonious, and yet 
perhaps it will convey the meaning better 
than if it had been studied. She who can 
sing like Patti. </p>

<p>Upon the sounds of her sweet throat 
the multitude hang entranced, and for the 
song they half worship the singer. To be 
thus courted, thus admired, must indeed 
be a pleasure, because it is for something 
personal and genuine, not for any adventitious 
advantage of position, not because of a 
crown or wealth, simply for one's self. She
may be excused — nay, she may be praised 
for pride and vanity in so glorious a posses- 
sion. </p>

<p>Such joy — such supreme triumph — is only 
for woman; for man there is no similar 
altitude, he cannot climb so high. It is 
not for any man to be like this. </p>

<p>For him the nearest approach — many 
miles asunder — is to be able to write a 
really good Opera Bouffe. Something that 
will set the feet of all a-shufHing, the 
eyes gleaming, the ears tingling, the whole 
body aglow with music, and hearts the 
better for a merry hour. Nothing so good 
as a good Opera Bouffe. The music, the 
crossing of the intertwining feet, the graceful 
chorus-dancing, the changing colour — there is 
nothing so good as this in our days. </p>

<p>How many hundred dozen Archbishops of 
Canterbury would it take to equal one bar 
of ' Madame Angot'.^ </p>

<p>But then this is far, very far beneath 
the singer who can sing like the adorable
Patti. To her must the foremost position in 
all the world be given. For crowned heads 
are only bowed to because they are crowned, 
statesmen because they are in place, generals 
because they are in command, millionaires 
because they have money. But the singer — 
the divine singer, the divine Patti — is 
worshipped because of herself. How delicious 
to be a little like her! Even to be a little 
like her is reserved for woman; a man is 
out of the competition. </p>

<p>I came to these conclusions while I was 
endeavouring to construct this book in such 
a manner that the reader should see the 
events and the people, one after the other, 
without any wearisome explanations between 
as to how it came to be so. While I was 
considering and trying to surmount the 
difficulty it occurred to me how happy the 
dramatist must be, since he places his hero 
and his heroine in living shape at once 
before you. </p>

<p>There they are on the stage — you see
them, they walk, they breathe, they talk, 
they accompany their words with appropriate 
action, and convey their meaning in an 
indisputable manner. </p>

<p>They stand there before you at once 
in their full orrowth. The dramatist has 
not to present his heroine to you at first 
as an infant in arms, then as a girl at 
boarding-school, finally as a full-grown 
woman. You understand her at once. </p>

<p>The unfortunate narrator is not permitted 
these advantages. It takes me pages upon 
pages to describe a single character, and 
then very probably you do not see half 
what I hoped you would see. There is no 
sound of voice, no movement or gesture to 
convey the impression. But this is not all. </p>

<p>The happy dramatist lets down the curtain 
upon one scene in town, and lifts it upon 
another scene in the country; the curtain 
falls in Ensfland and rises in the backwoods 
of America, and the change is accepted in- 
stantly. He has not to set some one before
the footlights to laboriously explain (while 
the scenes are shifted) how his people get 
into a train and go down to Somerset, or to 
follow them three thousand miles, day by 
day, across the Atlantic. Up rolls the curtain, 
and there they are at once. </p>

<p>The unfortunate narrator has to tell you 
how the change came about, why it came 
about, and when; and to explain every little 
circumstance, or else it would appear that he 
was violating probability. He has to show 
you the why and wherefore, and to tell 
you how certain people got into certain 
positions at a certain time. My arm and 
hand very often ache with the labour of 
writing just to explain the simplest set of 
circumstances, which upon the stage would not 
have been thought of 7'hey would be taken 
for granted. This is very hard upon me, I 
think. Could not you let me write my scenes 
one after the other, and supply the connecting- 
links for me out of your own imagination, as 
you do on the stage? </p>



<p>We left Felise and Martial in a very loving 
attitude, which, however, was not observable 
at a distance because of the shadow of the 
beech-tree. But the next day Martial did 
not return, nor did he appear the day after, 
leaving Felise to a wearisome uncertainty. 
Several days passed, and still he did not 
come. </p>

<p>She was almost inclined to boldly go over 
to the Manor House and try and see him, 
but a triflino^ circumstance had occurred 
which deterred her. Miss Barnard sent for 
the album of Dante instead of fetchino- it 
herself, as she had promised to do. Felise 
fancied this was an indication of disapproval 
— a silent declaration of opposition. His 
cousins then had discovered her secret; they 
considered their Martial might do better. </p>

<p>Her conjecture was correct. When the 
younger Miss Barnard came home and heard 
the elder's account of Felise's visit, she at 
once pronounced that there must be some 
concealed motive. The elder sister, full of
Dante, looked over and above the lesser 
motives which animate people, and took them 
at their word. Her ideal so far elevated her 
that she regarded affairs with pure eyes, and 
did not search for pettiness. Such is the 
effect of an ideal; let us all try and possess 
some ideal for this reason. </p>

<p>The younger sister, having no Dante, 
thought more of petty ambitions, and in- 
stantly suspected Felise of designs upon 
Martial. Now as a sharp woman, this young 
lady (young by comparison) much desired 
Martial's marriage with Rosa, whose wealth 
would be so useful in the family, and would 
enable them to enter more into society. In 
short, she quite hoped, under the cover, as 
it were, of this advantageous connection, to 
be some day advanced to the marriage state 
herself. </p>

<p>On seeing Rosa, and hearing Rosa's con- 
jecture that Felise was the woman, she at 
once agreed; there could not be a doubt 
about it: besides, they tracked him and
ascertained the direction in which he went. 
Between them, no doubt, they would have 
found out that it was Felise who sent back 
Ruy as a present, had not their eyes been 
blinded by their own estimate of money. 
They knew Felise was poor, and it never 
occurred to them that the poor in purse but 
great in spirit are capable of efforts which the 
rich become too indolent to make. </p>

<p>The younger sister, being overbearing and 
masterful, bore down the elder's admiration 
of Felise, and persuaded her not to go for 
the album. Felise was right in supposing 
the sending, instead of coming for it, an 
indication of hostility. Meantime the younger 
Miss Barnard left no opportunity of openly 
proclaiming in Martial's hearing how mean a 
proceeding it was for a man who had no 
money to marry a girl with none, and so to 
drag her down to share his own pitiable 
condition. Apart, two poor persons might 
get on; together, they must sink. </p>

<p>These remarks were not very palatable
to Martial; besides, he was aware that his 
cousins sympathized with Rosa, that they 
visited her, condoled with her, and regarded 
his conduct as cruel in the extreme. </p>

<p>Just at this time a curious event occurred: 
Rosa (who was rich already) received a 
legacy of four thousand pounds, so devised 
as to be entirely at her own disposal. It is 
a very different thing to be rich through 
another person, as Rosa was in the existence 
of her father, and to be rich one's self. By this 
legacy Rosa's position became exalted beyond 
all competition In Maasbury. Being of age, 
she could do exactly what she chose with the 
money. Such is the irony of life — to those 
who have, m.ore comes; yet, as In Rosa's case, 
it often happens that they cannot enjoy it. </p>

<p>Rosa, poor girl, felt this legacy as the 
bitterest blow she had yet received. It 
mocked her. The day she saw Fellse pass 
and recosrnised her as ' the other woman," she 
fancied she found some consolation In the 
thought of her money, which gave her a
;;i — 2
sense of injured righteousness. That had 
faded, and now this announcement struck 
her heavily. </p>

<p>Four thousand pounds, entirely her own, 
absolutely at her fingers'-ends; four thousand 
pounds, and not one moment of happiness! 
Though the legacy could not be paid over 
till the usual period, still, as the daughter of 
a commercial man, she well knew she could 
obtain a large portion of it as an advance. 
But with all that money she could not buy 
one moment's peace of heart. </p>

<p>She reflected that if she had possessed this 
money but a short time ago, she need not 
have consented to a postponement of her 
engagement with Martial. It would have 
been enough to have freed his farm from 
every embarrassment; and if her father had 
objected, he could not have prevented her 
from doing as she chose. In her misery 
Rosa was not so dutiful in her ideas as she 
had been in her days of moderate happiness. 
She would have defied her father now. </p>

<p>Too late. The money had come too late; 
her character had strengthened too late — it 
was a bitter irony. </p>

<p>Since this had happened, of course the 
Misses Barnard (or the younger and more 
practical of them) still more earnestly desired 
the renewal of Martial's engagement with 
Rosa, and would have done anything femi- 
nine spite could devise to have destroyed his 
increasing admiration of Felise. Martial 
heard much in an indirect way of Rosa's 
sufferings, of her improved personal appear- 
ance, of the forwardness of women who 
relied upon their assurance, and so forth, till 
it was- with the utmost difficulty he restrained 
his inclination to order the backbiters out of 
his house. </p>

<p>But he had other matters to trouble him; 
he had made no secret to Felise, nor indeed 
to Mr. Goring, of his financial difficulties. 
Ever since so large a sum had been bor- 
rowed for the purchase of the houses for 
the Misses Barnard — a piece of unpractical
generosity on his part — things had gone 
from bad to worse. The harvest, beautiful 
to look at, was worth so little in the market 
that it scarcely repaid the cost of cultivation. 
Heavy tithes — the curse of agriculture — had 
to be deducted from it. </p>

<p>The deduction allowed from the rent was 
too small to be of practical value, just enough 
to enable the landlord to pose as a benevo- 
lent friend of the farmers. When land itself 
has fallen from 25 to 50 per cent, in value, 
the return of 10 or 15 per cent, of the rent is 
evidently far below the true proportion. To 
correspond with the fall in freehold value, it 
ought not to be less than twice as much. 
Disease was among the cattle and sheep, 
and those that were healthy could scarcely be 
sold because the markets were closed. </p>

<p>Martial was at the end of his resources, 
and had not cash to pay the reapers labour- 
ing in the wheat, while Love and Time were 
idle, the sun glowed, and the distant thunder 
rolled in from the sea. </p>

<p>Felise counselled him to sell his horse 
again, and he was obliged to do it. Little did 
he imagine that he was selling her present. 
Ruy returned to Robert Godwin, and the 
reapers were paid. </p>

<p>These influences were not without effect; 
they rendered Martial more sensitive than 
usual. He felt that he ought not to go into 
the society of a beautiful woman whom he 
could not marry, and of whom he said to 
himself, * I do not love her," merely because 
he worshipped her beauty. Yet he went. </p>

<p>After the delirium of exquisite pleasure 
that lovely morning under the shade of the 
beech, when ideal beauty came to him un- 
sought, when the dream of his life descended 
to him in actual reality, as the Immortals 
descended in the early days of Greece to 
favoured man, he forcibly woke himself up 
with a strong wrench. </p>

<p>He would not see her, he would not enter 
into the circle of her power; he would resist 
it and retain his freedom, that freedom
i84
so dearly bought before with loss of self- 
respect. By sheer strength of will he re- 
solved to retain his individuality — to stand 
clear of dreams and ideals — to be himself 
alone. </p>

<p>For some days, with severe self-restraint, 
he continued in this resolution; but at last, 
so deeply ingrained in his nature was his 
worship of the beautiful, he was compelled to 
own to himself that he must look upon the 
Picture. He would not go near it or speak 
to it, but he must look at it. </p>

<p>Wednesday evening he knew was the time h 
when Mary Shaw could generally be found " 
in the rickyard (it was her evening out). She 
would obtain him a glance at the Picture. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2>

<p>ILLER BOND had long since 
found out, In an indirect way, who 
the gentleman was that met the 
hamlet prude Mary Shaw in the rickyard 
by the mill-pool. He had observed, too, 
that of late this gentleman had ceased to 
come, and he had heard through his assistant 
(who watched the machinery while Bond 
looked over the hatch) of Barnard's frequent 
visits to Beechknoll. </p>

<p>It was a matter of common hamlet gossip 
how Miss Felise had thrown over Mr. 
Godwin ' all of a sudden ' and ' took ' to 
* that there idle Barnard fellow '; not much
of a change for her either, but ' hur be a 
flighty one, hur be/ was their comment. </p>

<p>The miller had noticed, too, that when 
Mary Shaw and Abner met in the rickyard, 
their courting generally ended in Mary's 
having a burst of crying, sometimes passion- 
ately weeping, and becoming so convulsed 
and overcome that it was with difficulty he 
could soothe her. </p>

<p>One evening — it was Wednesday — after 
witnessing such a scene from behind the 
stubble-rick and elder-bush, the miller saw 
Abner and Mary start to go away, Mary 
still hanging upon him, and apparently sob- 
bing. After they had gone the miller com- 
posed himself upon the log of timber, hoisted 
up his gun on his knees, and prepared to 
shoot the first rat that ventured out now 
he could do so without disturbing the 
lovers. </p>

<p>Two or three minutes afterwards he 
heard a slight cry and a great splash in the 
mill-pool, and jumped up in alarm to see
what it could be. He had to run some yards 
before he could see down into the pool. 
Leaning over the fence he strained his short 
neck and saw Mary Shaw struggling and 
gasping in the water. </p>

<p>Some kind of shout or loud exclamation 
issued from his lips, and then, as if by 
mechanism, he put his gun to his shoulder 
and fired up in the air. </p>

<p>At the same moment Martial came up — 
looked over — exclaimed — tore off his coat, 
and then paused, for he remembered his 
heavy boots. They were laced and tied 
tightly; he got his penknife and slit the 
laces, kicked them off, stepped upon the 
fence, balanced himself a second, and sprang 
forward. </p>

<p>The miller, at the sound of the splash when 
Martial struck the surface, hurled his gun 
away and set up another shout. He then 
began dancing, stamping his feet up and 
down like a child in a rage. </p>

<p>Martial went down feet first, holding his
breath; the water closed over him. In 
another second he rose and began to swim, 
and in half a minute — he had to go round 
a little to seize her properly — he had hold of 
poor Mary. She fainted immediately after 
he touched her. </p>

<p>Martial instandy swam with her towards 
the side of the pool, for a moment forgetting 
that he could not land on a perpendicular 
wall of chalk. As he neared the side he 
looked up and remembered that there were 
no means of exit from the pool, which was, 
in fact, a very large well. He began to 
tread water and paddle with one hand (hold- 
ing Mary with the other) while he considered 
how to get out. </p>

<p>He could not see a way out; steep walls 
of chalk enclosed him on every side. 
Another face was now gazing down at him; 
the miller's man had run up at the sound 
of the gun, expecting to see a dead rat, 
instead of which there were two human beings
m a trap. </p>

<p>* Is there no way to get out?" said Mar- 
tial. </p>

<p>"No, that there bean't," said the miller's 
man. ' There bean't no way out. You be 
drownded." </p>

<p>The miller himself stopped dancing with 
his feet, and now sucked the forefinsfer first 
of one hand and then of the other, staring 
the while without blinking at the pair in 
the water. First he thrust one finger in 
his mouth, and then the other, and pulled 
them out with a sucking sound. His shock 
head of red hair, as he strained his neck 
over the fence, was dimly reflected on the 
ripples of the pool. Martial's mov'ements 
sent ripples breaking against the cliffs of 
chalk. </p>

<p>So far as Martial could see there was 
not a root, nor a piece of ivy, nor any plant, 
nor even a blade of grass in a crevice to 
which he could cling. There was no hatch 
in the pool; it was outside where the water 
ran from a culvert into the mill-wheel trough. </p>



<p>So long as he could tread water, or swim 
to and fro, he should survive; as his strength 
decreased he must sink unless help came. 
The two fools looking down were evidently 
too stupid to assist him. </p>

<p>"Help!" shouted Martial at the top of 
his voice. ' Help! help !" hoping some one 
passing might hear and bring the aid of 
intelligence to direct mere muscles. The 
perpendicular wall-like sides of chalk sent 
his voice straight up; it rose into the air 
instead of spreading laterally. No one 
could have heard at a short distance from 
the edge of the pool. </p>

<p>* Us can't help," said the miller's man, 
stolidly looking down, with his arms crossed 
miller-fashion on the fence. ' You be 
drownded." </p>

<p>"Fetch some one else!" said Martial, angry 
and anxious. </p>

<p>"Bean't no good. Bean't nobody about." </p>

<p>Aware that he could not possibly hold 
out very long with Mary's dead-weight to
support, Martial began to swim with her 
slowly round the pool, eagerly scanning 
the chalk walls for some hole or chink 
or ledge upon which he could rest his 
hand and so support himself. There was 
none. He tried to scrape a hole — the chalk 
crumbled a little, but was hard under the 
immediate surface; his nails would be worn 
to the quick, and even then he could 
not do it. He might perhaps have done 
it with his penknife, but he had dropped 
it on the grass after cutting his laces. </p>

<p>* Be quick!" he called. ' Fetch some one 
— quick!" </p>

<p>"They be all gone to Jones's sale," said the 
miller's man. ' You won't last lonof." </p>

<p>Had not Martial been in so dangferous a 
position I doubt not he would have cursed 
him with set teeth. But extreme danger 
silences anger; now danger was increasing 
every moment, Martial lost his rage at their 
stupidity. He ceased to regard them as 
human beings whose disposition concerned
him, at whose senselessness he should feel 
annoyed, or hurt at their callousness. All 
his faculties were strained to discover means 
of escape, and the personal characters of the 
fools on the brink above faded out of sight. 
He forgot them as men; he looked at ,them 
as machines. </p>

<p>Could he animate these stolidities? Could 
he set their slow minds in operation by any 
suggestion? </p>

<p>He asked himself, as he again trod water 
and paddled with one hand, what he should 
try to do if he were in their place on the 
bank and others were in peril. </p>

<p>* Get a rope!" he shouted immediately, as 
the answer to his thought. </p>

<p>"A raup?" </p>

<p>"Yes, a rope — quick!" </p>

<p>The miller's man looked over his shoulder 
once or twice, lifted his greasy hat and 
scratched his head; then he turned and 
walked slowly away to try and find a rope. </p>

<p>Though it was the height of the summer
the water was cold; the rays of the sun 
never reached it, and Martial felt a distinct 
loss of heat. It sucfcrested a calculation. 
How long could he endure? </p>

<p>He crushed down the thought, and ad- 
dressed himself again to the task of animating 
the other stolidity on the bank above. </p>

<p>"Miller! throw me something to hold — 
something that will float!" </p>

<p>'You be Miss Goring's man," said Bond, 
finding speech at last. </p>

<p>"Throw me a plank — a pole — a rail ' </p>

<p>"You be hur man. I knows who you be." </p>

<p>* Fling me something — a log — a gate — 
anything!" </p>

<p>"Hur will go mad," said the miller, to 
whom Martial's death by drowning was a 
foregone and accepted conclusion. </p>

<p>He thought not of Martial, but of Felise — 
Felise who had once given him three red 
roses. </p>

<p>The sight of Mary in the pool had upset 
the balance of his brain, which had hung
level like scales not in use so many years. 
This rude jolt sent his mind oscillating up 
and down as if the scales had been struck 
with a fist. Off went his gun — bang! He 
danced with his feet. He sucked his fore- 
fingers. </p>

<p>By degrees the scales settled, and he 
grasped the terrible meaning Martial's death 
would have to the child who had given him 
the three red roses. Now Miller Bond 
would gladly have worked day and night 
for her sake; he would have faced great 
danger; he would have done anything for 
her; his heart was still grateful for those 
flowers. This very anxiety upset the scales 
again; and, in short. Miller Bond lost his 
head. </p>

<p>"A gate," said Martial; * unhinge a gate ! 
Throw me something that will float!" </p>

<p>"Thur," said the miller with an idiotic grin, 
plucking off his hat and hurling it into the 
water, as if Martial could cling to the greasy 
felt — a straw indeed for a drowning man. </p>

<p>Next came his apron, then a shower of 
little sticks torn from the fence, then a 
handful of dock leaves; then he ran to and 
fro and returned with a heavy iron sheep- 
trouQfh. which he raised above his head. </p>

<p>"Take care!" shouted Martial, for if the 
trough struck him it would stun him, perhaps 
kill him instantly. </p>

<p>Splash came the trough, raising a wave 
which washed Martial and his burden to and 
fro; the trough sank immediately. </p>

<p>"Wood!" shouted Martial ; ' not iron — iron 
sinks." Danger made him as patient as a 
mother explaining the properties of things to 
a litde child. ' Get some wood." </p>

<p>"Hur will go mad," said the miller, whose 
brain-scales were settling again. He paused, 
and gazed down at the pair in the water. </p>

<p>'Thur bean't no raup," said the miller's 
man, coming back. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2>

<p>O rope!" cried Martial ; * then get 
a chain." </p>

<p>"Gawd!" said the miller's man. 
' A chain. To be zure." </p>

<p>As if the substitution of a chain for a rope 
was indeed a wonderful idea. He started 
again for a chain — this time more quickly; 
Martial had begun to animate him. These 
slow and stolid minds, while under the im- 
mediate influence of a stronger intelligence, 
can be forced into activity; but once let that 
stronger intelligence go far enough away for 
them to escape its personal influence and 
they sink back into immovability. </p>

<p>The marvellous intellect of the great Julius
Caesar exercised the most extraordinary power 
over the men with whom he was surrounded, 
insomuch that nothing was too much for 
them, no danger too great, no fatigue too 
prolonged, no rapidity of movement too 
trying. But when once the sea divided him 
from part of his forces, those very men fell 
by degrees into stolid immovability, so that 
neither orders, threats, nor persuasions could 
for months induce them to sail to his as- 
sistance, though they well understood his 
danger. It is recorded of him that he had 
his eyes turned day and night towards the 
sea; still they delayed to send, so dense 
already had their stolidity become. So, too, 
when a great genius who has stirred the 
world and wakened its dull heart ceases 
to address it, it speedily falls back into 
stolidity. </p>

<p>The miller's man started quickly for the 
chain; but, out of sight of Martial, his feet 
resumed their accustomed slowness of motion. </p>

<p>"Wood — throw something of wood — </p>



<p>timber!" cried Martial again to the miller, 
whose red head projected over the fence. </p>

<p>* When was you and she going to be 
married?" said the miller. </p>

<p>* Wood — rails — posts!" reiterated Martial. 
'Chain," said the miller's man, appearing
with a set of chain-traces such as are used on 
wapfSfons. He let the end of the chain down, 
Martial grasped it. The miller took hold 
above behind his man, and they began to 
haul; but Martial was obliged to let the 
chain slip through his fingers — his wrist was 
not strong enough. When he and Mary 
began to rise out of the water their combined 
weight was too much for his sinews. In 
endeavouring to get out of the water, as for 
instance into a boat, the weight of the body 
seems suddenly increased. </p>

<p>Martial was not Herculean in proportions 
or strength; he was sinewy and able to bear 
fatigue, but not powerful in the manner of a 
dray-horse. There was nothing gigantic in 
his muscles. </p>

<p>Already wearied and chilled by the icy 
well-water, he could not endure so great a 
strain. They ceased hauling; he held the 
chain, and it was so far an advantage to him 
that it supported him; he had not to tread 
water or paddle. </p>

<p>Once more with some failing at heart, he 
tried to think. What could he do if in their 
place? Endeavouring to reverse the actual 
condition of things, he said to himself, ' I am 
trying to get out: suppose I was trying to 
get in safely, what should I do? I should 
put down a ladder." </p>

<p>* A ladder!" he shouted. 'Fetch a ladder!" </p>

<p>"Gawd!" cried the miller's man, opening 
his mouth, overcome with amazement that 
anyone should have so many ideas. ' Come, 
master; takes two with a lonfj ladder." </p>

<p>The miller turned to go with his man. </p>

<p>"Fasten the chain first," said Martial. </p>

<p>But their minds were occupied with the 
new notion of a ladder, and they forgot the 
chain. It slipped from the fence and im- </p>

<p>mediately sank; had they fastened it Martial 
could have clung to it. He was obliged to 
recommence treading water; then, weary of 
that, he began to swim slowly in a circle. </p>

<p>Chilled so as to have lost feeling in his 
extremities, his arms were growing stiff, and 
he felt that his chest did not inflate itself 
fully, so that he lost the sense of buoyancy 
proper to a swimmer. The store of force 
inherent in his frame was slipping from him; 
the limbs were there and the muscles re- 
mained, but the invisible power which moves 
them oozed away. Round the dark pool he 
partly dragged, partly supported his burden; 
it was better to swim on than to try and keep 
in one spot. </p>

<p>Would they never come with the ladder? 
Perhaps they would not find one in time. 
Some one might have called at the mill, and 
they were stopping to load his cart with 
sacks of flour before they returned to assist 
him. </p>

<p>The pool was in deep shadow, being under
a hill. Blackness everywhere about him; no 
gleam or glisten on the surface; the shadow 
was heavy on the pool. </p>

<p>Would they never come with the ladder? 
The mill-clack was audible in the well-like 
cavity of the pool; it beat time — time that 
was ebbing fast. How slow they were! </p>

<p>The shadow had been idle on the dial in 
the hour of love; now it shot forward, racing 
to the edge, slipping from which it would 
disappear and end with the ending of life. </p>

<p>Suddenly a glow of lovely light poured 
down into the darksome pit, a delicate rosy 
brilliance gleaming on the ripples of his 
progress, tinting the white chalk walls. He 
looked up and saw overhead a cloud, which 
by some magic had been filled with the hues 
of the sunset, and reflected them like a 
mirror down upon him. Mary's pale in- 
animate face, washed by the cold water, seemed 
to take upon itself the colours of happy child- 
hood — the roseate tint of laughing joyfulness. 
The sunset was thrown from the sky into the 
depth of the pit. </p>

<p>His heart awoke again at the sight of it; 
the old, old love of the beautiful — the strength 
of the hills filled with the light of the sun — 
all the strong desire of life and colour and 
loveliness filled him again with fresh effort. </p>

<p>Felise appeared to his mind in the glow of 
the rosy cloud. Till that moment, absorbed 
in the struggle, he had not thought of her. 
She came to him with the light. A low- 
sound escaped from his lips. He should lose 
her — if he sank he should lose her; she 
would not be his. </p>

<p>The greatest gift, the most wonderful and 
precious given to man; the deep love, the 
ideal beauty — he should lose it. He had 
himself purposely kept away from her. Oh, 
the folly of his scrupulous fancy! His free- 
dom; his poverty ; his paltry excuses to 
himself — the folly, the exceeding folly of it! 
Felise! — he spoke the name on his lips, yet 
the word did not issue as sound. If only 
those moments would return again, but it 
was too late. </p>

<p>It was unfortunate for him that he had 
thought of Feh'se; It weakened him ; it af- 
fected his heart. His head seemed to 
become a blank — the pit, the chalk walls, 
the rosy cloud disappeared; all was blank, as 
it felt to him, for an illimitable length of time, 
really the one-hundredth of a second; for 
that fragmentary moment he had fainted. But 
his heart beat again, and he saw a ladder 
descending, as it were, from the rosy glow 
above. </p>

<p>Felise! he tried to say, as he grasped it ; 
he clung to it; he got his foot on it, and 
paused and breathed — breathed fully. He 
began to go up carrying poor Mary; he 
paused again and breathed. Up again; they 
hauled him over the fence, and he fell on 
the grass exhausted. </p>

<p>"Hur's dead," said the miller's man, push- 
ing Mary as she lay, having dropped from 
Martial's arms, with his foot. His heavy 
shoe partly rolled her over; as he withdrew 
it she rolled back again. </p>



<p>"All auver with hur," he said. </p>

<p>At this Martial stood up, collecting his 
energies, and insisted upon one of them 
going for assistance. Then on the spot he 
began at once to follow the instructions for 
resuscitation, which he fortunately remem- 
bered. She soon showed signs of life — ani- 
mation had not been really suspended at all, 
and they carried her down to the mill. </p>

<p>Naturally what followed was confused; 
women came, and Mary was put to bed with 
blankets and brandy, A group stood about 
the mill-door. Martial, as soon as he was 
certain Mary was safe, was going, when the 
women above called for a doctor. A horse 
was found, and Martial rode in his wet 
clothes over to Maasbury for medical help. 
Thence he went home as quick as he could 
in a hired conveyance, but his dress had 
dried almost by the time he reached the 
Manor House. </p>

<p>Towards the morning Mary gave birth to 
a female child, which appeared healthy and
strong, despite its untimely arrival. Mary 
never saw it. She had been conscious at 
intervals, and told the doctor and the women 
something which agitated them; but after 
the birth she sank, and died in about two 
hours. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2>

<p>Y the old barn under one of the 
Spanish chestnut-trees, Felise sat 
down to wait for Martial. She 
was clad in black — mourning for Mary 
Shaw. The thickness of the chestnut spray- 
did not permit a single ray of the morning 
sun to reach her, as the beech had done. 
No rounded dot of sunshine lit up the black 
shadow of her dress under the green boughs. 
The swallows were still about the barn, as 
they had been when she came with her rod 
along the brook. They would never quite 
leave it till they flew to warmer lands; even 
in October they would rest in a row on the 
ridge, and twitter of their coming journey. </p>

<p>But the songs in the wood hard-by were
silent, the thrush and the blackbird had 
ceased, and the cuckoo had long been gone. 
There was no music of sweet birds" throats 
as dry August stooped under her sheaves. </p>

<p>The prickly green fruit of the chestnuts was 
visible among the boughs, and in the hedge 
by the copse the red berries of the bryony 
clustered thickly. Pouting at the top, the 
thistles which always strew the sward by a 
wood were ready to pour forth a shower of 
thistledown. Two large dragon-flies shot to 
and fro, excited into swiftest motion by the 
heat. Once a green and golden woodpecker 
passed, sweeping downwards in his flight 
almost to the ground, and rising again to the 
height of the trees. </p>

<p>From afar came the hum of a threshing- 
machine, winnowing out the fresh corn 
from the ear. A hum that sank to a 
mournful note and rose again — a curve 
of sound. There is something inarticu- 
lately human in the cry of the threshing- </p>



<p>machine. Wheat and bread — labour and Hfe 
— the past of the sowing, the future of the 
uncertain autumn, hazy and deepening into 
the gloom of winter. In the glow, and light, 
and heat of to-day, forget not that the leaves 
shall fall and the stubble be beaten by the 
rains and whitened by the snow; yet hope 
on, because the sunlight and the flowers shall 
assuredly succeed again. Inarticulately ex- 
pressing the meaning of the years and the 
rise and fall of time, the low hum stretches 
itself across the wide fields of grain. </p>

<p>The sparrows that had chattered so loudly 
round the eaves of the barn had gone out 
into the wheat. The swallows came at inter- 
vals and again soared into the air. Only the 
two dragon-flies remained, rushing to and fro. </p>

<p>Martial had told her all, manfully laying 
bare the recesses of his heart; warned thereto 
by his experience of the mill-pool, which told 
him not to trifle lonofer with the shadow on 
the dial. While we linger — while we stay 
— the shadow slips from the edge of the disk 
into universal night. </p>

<p>* He cannot love me;" this was the burden 
of her thoughts. ' He cannot love me." </p>

<p>He could admire her, he could worship 
her beauty, he could appreciate her worth, 
he could value her love, he could and would 
labour for her with all his powers, but he 
could not love. </p>

<p>He had loved another woman before her, 
and the spring of love was dry. </p>

<p>A woman will be able to understand the 
bitterness of this to her — he had loved 
another, therefore he could not love her. </p>

<p>A creaking of waggon-wheels went by in 
the narrow lane, it was a load of yellow 
sheaves, heavily jolting over the ruts, crush- 
ing the rushes that had grown in the way, 
the sheaves brushing against the wild cle- 
matis still flowering high up the bushes. 
She could see the top of the load above the 
hawthorn and hazel, slowly ascending the hill 
by the wood. </p>

<p>"He cannot love me." </p>

<p>He was hers, and yet he was not hers. </p>

<p>Thus Rosa was in part avenged, and re- 
turned bitterness for bitterness to the heart 
of her rival. Though now forsaken, she had 
received the first-fruits of love, and they 
could not be given to another. If Felise's 
existence was cruel to Rosa, so now Rosa's 
existence was cruel to Felise — yet not so 
cruel. </p>

<p>For with a deep sigh Felise became 
content. </p>

<p>"It is better," she said — •" it is better than 
not to have him at all. Had that been 
so, if I could not have had him, then it 
would have been best that the deep sea 
should cover me." </p>

<p>To the bitter jealousy of his first love 
given to another, she became superior, and 
overcame the stinor and venom of the 
thought. </p>

<p>It mattered not — he was Martial — he was 
hers. </p>

<p>But this was not all that her love had 
overcome. Rumours had been spread abroad
since Mary Shaw's death, of a kind which 
might have easily caused years of misunder- 
standing, might even have changed the 
course of their Hves, had it not been for the 
steadfastness of FeHse. </p>

<p>There was a scandal in the hamlet, that 
the child of Mary Shaw could claim another 
parent than the common labourer, Abner 
Brown. A gentleman had been seen to meet 
her clandestinely. Miller Bond had done 
•this mischief unwittingly. At the inquest 
they cross-questioned and worried him; they 
ascertained that Abner was the last person 
seen with her, and also that another person — 
Martial Barnard — had frequently met her 
there. The jury returned a verdict of 
suicide, but immediately afterwards Abner 
was arrested by the police on suspicion 
of murder, and put in the cell at Maas- 
bury. </p>

<p>No one had seen Mary leap in. She 
had admitted herself on her deathbed that 
she did so, but that might be to shield
Abner. At all events he would have to 
go before the magistrates and explain where 
he was when she did it. Abner said he 
had walked down into the road on quitting 
Mary, and heard nothing of the event 
till hours afterwards. He had left her to 
go home by herself in the same manner 
scores of times. Still he was in the cell 
at Maasbury. </p>

<p>The official theory was very simple and 
suggestive. They said, ' Here is a poor girl 
who has a gentleman lover and a labourer 
lover. It is easy to see that the common 
labourer would be jealous of the gentleman. 
On this fateful evening the gentleman is 
said to have come after the labourer had 
left. But we are not bound to believe this; 
the gentleman may have been there first — 
the labourer may have seen him. Certainly 
the miller declares the labourer went away; 
but then he owns he did not look any 
longer, so that it is possible the labourer 
may have returned and thrown her in. </p>

<p>Miller Bond states he heard a cry, showing 
the girl's terror as Abner seized her. 
These conjectures are sufficient to justify 
the committal of Abner Brown to await 
examination. As for the dying admis- 
sions of the girl, they are much lessened 
in value by the extraordinary state- 
ment she also made, and which cannot 
be taken into consideration for a moment. 
A girl who could say such a thing cannot 
be believed even on her deathbed." </p>

<p>So Abner went to the cell at Maasbury, 
and scandal was very rife at the hamlet, 
waxing bigger every hour. Miller Bond 
was in no small degree responsible for this. 
His confused statements could so easily be 
twisted to their purpose by malignant minds. 
In his heart he was anxious above all others 
to please Felise; as a fact he did or said 
exactly what was most calculated to give her 
pain. </p>

<p>The hamlet would not believe Abner, and 
would not believe the dead; it fastened
eagerly on a scandal which implicated a 
gentleman. It was not without foundation, 
because Martial could not publicly explain 
why he had met Mary Shaw. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin saw in these circumstances, 
which had so suddenly arisen, a means of 
gratifying the reflex action in his mind, which 
prompted him to injure the very person 
he loved. At his suggestion the police acted 
in securing Abner; he pointed out the 
possibility of Abner's guilt; without much 
possibility a hint from such a quarter was 
sufficient. This was a savage cut at the 
unfortunate labourer, and at the same time 
an unpleasant incident for Mr. Goring. </p>

<p>But it was Felise whom he desired to 
reach. The hamlet gossips gladly carried 
the tale to Beechknoll. That the shaft 
might go home Robert Godwin himself came 
over. He found Mr. Goring in the garden, 
and in despite of the other's plain-spoken 
desire to avoid him, forced him to hear 
the story. That Martial, while paying
attentions to Miss Goring, had taken an 
unmanly advantage of this poor girl. Goring, 
as usual, was working in the garden when 
Robert would not be shaken off. </p>

<p>"The whole story is an abominable false- 
hood," said Mr. Goring. * Mr. Barnard is 
incapable of such a thing. I know the 
real reason for the meetings between them. 
I must really decline, Mr. Godwin, to discuss 
the matter further with you." </p>

<p>* Barnard will have to tell the truth before 
the magistrates," said Godwin, not in the 
least abashed. * This is not the first dis- 
creditable transaction in which he has been 
engaged. He promised marriage to Miss 
Rosa Wood, and jilted her. He has wasted 
his substance and that of his cousins — he 
is a spendthrift and a scoundrel!" </p>

<p>* Sir, I request you to quit my pre- 
mises!" </p>

<p>"Sir, your name, and that of your niece, 
will figure largely in the public investiga- 
tion." </p>



<p>"Investigation! I bid you beware of 
investigation. The world knows already 
why Mary Shaw committed suicide." </p>

<p>"I dare anyone to repeat that statement; 
they shall be prosecuted for slander." </p>

<p>"I repeat the statement. Mary Shaw 
committed suicide because she knew that her 
aged father and mother, and all her family, 
would be expelled from their cottage if 
her disgrace became known. The poor girl 
died to save their home for them." </p>

<p>"Most infamous! — you shall certainly be 
prosecuted for slander." </p>

<p>"Most infamous, certainly — I cast the word 
in your teeth, Mr. Godwin. I despise you. 
You left this poor girl no refuge. You 
ordered her lover's parents to quit their 
home — there was no possibility of their 
marriage. She was aware of the penalty 
if she was not married. Rather than see her 
aged parents turned into the road — to starve 
or end their broken days in the workhouse — 
she did this dreadful thing-." </p>

<p>"You shall be served for slander imme- 
diately." </p>

<p>"By all means let me be served — I desire 
nothing better. So much the quicker will 
your reign come to an end. And now, quit 
my premises!" </p>

<p>Having no further threat or disclosure to 
make, Godwin at last retired, so far dis- 
comfited. </p>

<p>Martial had acquainted Felise and Mr. 
Goring with every circumstance the instant 
after the inquest. Consequently Godwin 
could make no impression; yet, as he retired 
discomfited and burning with anger, he re- 
flected that at least he had given form, shape, 
and substance to an indefinite rumour. He 
had delivered it at his opponent's gates, and 
thrust it home. </p>

<p>Far less causes have led to lifelong separa- 
tions. </p>

<p>Deeply hurt by poor Mary's untimely 
death, Felise could not do enough to satisfy 
herself for the infant at the mill. She en- </p>



<p>gaged a nurse for it, and saw that every 
necessity was supplied. </p>

<p>"If she had only told me," Felise repeated; 
' if she had only told me, all would then have 
been prevented." </p>

<p>"I would have sold my land but that they 
should have had a home," said Mr. Goring. 
' I blame Abner greatly. He should have 
told me. But we were all blind — we should 
have guessed. Mary could hardly walk up- 
stairs sometimes — and her fainting-fit. Poor 
child! — poor child !" </p>

<p>The shock of Mary's death, the imputa- 
tions against Martial, the arrest of Abner, 
came very heavily upon Felise. Martial she 
never doubted for an instant; yet, certain of 
his innocence as she was, these envenomed 
shafts always leave a wound. An unwonted 
gloom fell upon her. The shadow had grown 
deep and dark upon the dial. </p>

<p>Her love carried her straight past the pit- 
fall of doubt which had been opened beside 
her path. Her love shone the brighter and
the steadier as she overcame. But she had 
known sorrow. </p>

<p>Again Rosa was avenged — her rival had 
known sorrow. </p>

<p>A lesser love might have doubted, might 
have made inquiries; words might have been 
spoken never to be forgotten. But this great 
heart was untouched. Had these insinuations 
been true, and had she known them to be 
true, it would have made no difference. No 
matter what he had done, he would still have 
been hers. But her glory was that she had 
not doubted. </p>

<p>Still she had known sorrow, and her head 
drooped as she waited under the Spanish 
chestnut. There were no songs in the copse 
now. </p>

<p>"He cannot love me," she thought. ' He 
is mine, but he cannot love me." </p>

<p>Once, gazing into the clear water of the 
trout-pool and seeing her own face reflected, 
she had triumphantly believed in her power 
to make him love her. She had failed. </p>



<p>Opposite to her the Interior of the barn 
opened wide and gaunt where the great 
doors had formerly been. Diffused Hght lit 
the interior immediately opposite; farther in 
there was shadow in the summer day. Burnt 
by sun and beaten by rain, the red tiles of 
the broad roof, coated with orange moss, 
glowed under the fervent heat of the August 
morninof. The surface of the roof seemed to 
fluctuate, as if the colour came and went — 
now deep, now paler, red-orange alight with 
sunbeams. Almost touching it, the boughs 
of the other chestnut massed their cool 
green against the tiles. Underneath was the 
shadow of the vast cavern-like interior. </p>

<p>Since Martial had returned and told her 
all, it seemed as if she could not part from 
him. Perhaps the sudden loss of Mary 
had unconsciously rendered her anxious — 
snatched away without warning; perhaps she 
feared for him too, so that, though he came 
every day, yet she dreaded the moment of 
parting. She had got into the habit of walk- </p>

<p>inof with him as far as the old barn on his 
way home in the evening, and of coming as 
far as that to meet him in the morning. </p>

<p>As she sat opposite the barn suddenly she 
looked up — some slight movement in the 
cavern-like interior had caught her eye; but, 
on gazing steadily, she could not see any- 
thing. It must have been fancy. She re- 
collected the idle tale that the barn was 
haunted, only to accuse herself of nervous- 
ness. Besides, it was broad daylight. </p>

<p>Immediately afterwards the sound of a 
shot in the copse startled her; but she smiled, 
knowing who had fired. Three minutes after- 
wards Martial came towards her, carrying his 
litde oval-bore rook and rabbit rifle. It was 
too early for game, but the young rabbits 
were now ready. </p>

<p>They did not sit down, but walked on 
towards Beechknoll, past the still elms of 
the meadows, past the gnarled oaks, by the 
copses, by the green flags of the brook, 
pausing now and then in the shade for those
glances which speak so much silently. Be 
sure she did not think the less of him 
because he had risked his life in the mill- 
pool. Natural enough that she should exalt 
his deed into heroism. When we think so 
highly of another, it seems impossible but 
that they must in some degree incline to 
our wishes. We transfer our feelings to 
them. </p>

<p>In the dreamy woodlands, by the running 
brook, it seemed to her that by-and-by surely 
he must love her. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2>

<p>HE key turned, the heavy door of 
the cell swung open, and the 
constable who had just come on 
guard-duty looked in upon Abner. </p>

<p>'They've put her in," he said. 'It's all 
over." </p>

<p>"Yes/ said Abner, without lifting his gaze. 
He understood what was meant. </p>

<p>"They've planted her," said the constable; 
his words to us would have sounded hard 
and cruel in their bareness and naked meaning, 
but he meant kindly. ' They've planted 
her." </p>

<p>Mary Shaw had been interred. Abner 
still said nothing. </p>



<p>* Her was buried in oak/ continued the 
constable. * Not many of her sort as has 
oak planking." </p>

<p>"Who did that?" asked the prisoner, look- 
ing up. </p>

<p>"Miss Goring paid for it. Leastways her 
had it done; s'pose Mr. Goring paid for it. 
She said she could not abear her to be buried 
in deal like the workhouse folk. So her lies 
in oak. The kid is all right; Miss Goring 
have had it seed to. Don't you fret; there 
ain't no case agen you when it comes to a 
full bench." </p>

<p>Abner had been simply remanded by 
Cornleigh Cornleigh till the day of the 
magistrates" meeting. </p>

<p>"I knows that," said the prisoner, ' You 
knows I didn't do it; they must be fools as 
says so." </p>

<p>'Well, I told you I'd tell you all as there 
was," said the constable, preparing to lock 
the door. ' She could not have been buried 
nicer if she'd been a young lady. You'll be
discharged directly you sees the Bench." 
The cell-door was closed. </p>

<p>The prisoner's chin drooped on his broad 
chest. Out from his silent sorrow Howed 
warm tears, tears which neither the bitter 
loss of Mary nor the insult and injustice of 
his confinement could cause, but which flowed 
at a touch of kindness, Felise's kindness 
went to his heart, already growing stubborn 
under the stony handling of fate. </p>

<p>To the dead there is no difference between 
deal and oak, or elm — a ditch is the same as 
a tomb; but to the living, who will one day 
die, there is every difference. Depend upon 
it, too great respect cannot be paid to the 
dead. Therein the deepest, the most subtle 
of the chords of human nature is touched. </p>

<p>In London the coffins of the 'pauper" 
dead (let the word ' pauper ' be accursed!) 
have been seen to tumble into the stony 
street; a heap of the dead carted at once, like 
the carcases of animals, till they broke down 
the carriage. What terrible folly our boasted
self-government of boards is capable of — 
this uttermost folly of destroying respect for 
the dead to save a few miserable shillings! </p>

<p>Abner Brown was by nature loyal and true 
— of that ' grit ' and character of which 
Nelson's worthies were made. He was 
willing to work and to laugh in his work, 
and to serve with faithful service for three 
score years and ten. Do you not think he 
had cause to be grateful? He had three 
principal causes of gratitude. </p>

<p>His aged and helpless parents were to be 
turned into the road. </p>

<p>His sweetheart had committed suicide 
because her parents should not be punished 
for her disgrace. </p>

<p>He was himself in prison, labelled for ever 
as a suspected murderer, simply because he 
was poor; for no man who wore broadcloth 
and gold watch-chain would have been 
committed on so unsupported a charge. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2>

<p>H E day of the great presentation to 
Cornleigh Cornleigh, Esq., hap- 
pening just now, Mr. Goring drove 
Felise in to Maasbury to attend the meeting. 
For five-and-twenty years he had avoided all 
such movements, retired among his trees, 
till at the moment when he desired to act he 
found himself powerless. Absolute silence — 
absolute retirement, destroys a man's hold on 
the world. Not for the best of all objects 
could he now obtain the attention of the well- 
disposed; he could call no one to assist the 
innocent and helpless. </p>

<p>Alone, a man is powerless. It is when his 
voice acts like a lever that he is mighty; a
lever that stirs those that hear it, and in their 
turn they stir others, till the circle widening, 
an irresistible wave is formed. He had to 
begin again at the beginning; first, to see 
and be present at what was going on; next, 
to make friends; and finally, to set foot in 
the ring and do battle. </p>

<p>Though happy with Martial, Felise, when 
by herself, was greatly depressed by the loss 
of Mary. If I have not set forth her sorrow 
in so many words, it is because it must be 
apparent that a nature like hers would be 
deeply grieved. Mr. Goring did not like 
her to remain at home alone, and persuaded 
her to accompany him into the town, thinking 
it would be in some degree a change. 
Martial was to join them there and return 
with them. </p>

<p>At the door of the assembly-room, in 
Maasbury, they were advised to go up in 
the gallery, as there was a considerable 
gathering of the opposition party, and a fight 
was probable. The gallery was reserved for
ladies, or those who wished to be spectators 
merely. They went up, and found it already 
crowded with ladies, many of whom felt an 
interest in certain proceedings which were to 
precede the presentation. </p>

<p>Rosa was there, and saw Felise immediately 
— from that moment her eyes were fixed 
upon Felise — her glance crossed the looks of 
all others in the gallery: their eyes were bent 
upon the platform or the scene beneath; 
Rosa's glance was across their line of sight. 
Felise was unconscious of Rosa's presence, 
and was occupied in looking for Martial in 
the crowd below; at length Mr. Goring 
pointed him out on the platform. </p>

<p>When an eye looks steadily across the 
general line of view there seems something 
sinister in its gaze. Have you never chanced 
to look aside for a moment from the stage, or 
the concert, and accidentally caught such a 
glance regarding some one pitilessly .'* Your 
thought has just been filled with noble senti- 
ment, or the ear with sweet sound; this in- </p>

<p>terrupted glance reminds you that behind the 
scene of life passions or resentments are still 
burning. </p>

<p>The front of the crowd in the hall beneath 
was composed of farmers, or the farming 
interest, and of respectable tradesmen of 
Maasbury, who supported the platform with 
a firm cordon of the * right sort." For some 
depth it was in fact packed with the Corn- 
leigh Cornleigh party. But on the left side 
there began the thin end of the wedge of 
opposition, which gradually thickened till at 
the rear it widened out and held the whole 
hall by the doorway. </p>

<p>Anyone in the gallery with an eye for 
tactics could see that if danger was brewing, 
it would take effect through the thin end of 
the wedge, which went up within four or five 
of the platform. If this end were forced 
forwards by the thick part of the wedge 
behind, the opposition might very likely suc- 
ceed in storming the platform. </p>

<p>To defend a position like a platform
effectually you require a very stout cordon 
in front of it — a cordon equally thick every- 
where, and a second body posted towards 
the other end of the hall to take assailants 
in flank. Military talent was, however, 
scarcely to be expected in Maasbury. 
Robert Godwin was on the platform, of 
course. </p>

<p>The opposition was composed of smaller 
tradesmen, work-people, lower middle-class 
people living in their own houses, men work- 
ing in small factories, some very respectable 
persons from the villages (independent free- 
holders in a small way), a few labourers of 
strong political opinion who had stumped in 
and stood with their hands in their pockets, 
the tenants of rows of litde houses that had 
been built in the suburbs on ground that did 
not belong to Cornleigh Cornleigh; in short, 
of ' all sorts and conditions of men." </p>

<p>Some rushes had occurred already, and a 
woman who had foolishly ventured into the 
hall had to be dragged out fainting. </p>

<p>"Quite a different scene, I assure you," 
whispered Cornleigh Cornleigh's solicitor 
(and prompter) to a London visitor at The 
House who was on the platform — ' altogether 
a different scene to what we used to have at 
public meetings a few years ago. We used 
to have such orderly pleasant meetings, and 
everything went off smoothly and as you 
would wish. This is all owing to the ballot, 
you know; devilish thing, sir, the ballot !" </p>

<p>Somehow the Maasbury world had begun 
to lose its reverent awe of Cornleigh Corn- 
leigh, Esq. </p>

<p>Felise was full of wonder at what she saw 
beneath her; she could not understand it. 
She had read the great speeches of Demos- 
thenes; they read so calm and composed, 
as if delivered in an atmosphere of perfect 
peace. They soothed the mind and disposed 
it to think, and thought is quiet. Why did 
these people on the floor of the hall appear 
to hate each other so intensely? Why did 
they push and jostle with brutal rudeness, </p>

<p>and use expressions of savage violence? It 
did not look human. </p>

<p>That men, each in the same likeness, clad 
alike, speaking the same tongue, living in 
the same neighbourhood, should be ready to 
treat each other as blocks of timber to be 
kicked, pushed, shoved, and thrust about, was 
inexplicable to her. </p>

<p>The first view of an excited public meeting 
is very puzzling and disappointing to a mind 
accustomed to study and to hold opinions 
without rancour. </p>

<p>Felise felt hurt at the spectacle. It was 
not right. There was not the least necessity 
for this roughness — no cause whatever. It 
seemed to lower humanity. </p>

<p>"This is mildness itself, as yet," said ^Ir. 
Goring, replying to her. ' I remember scenes 
at elections thirty years ago which made one's 
blood curdle. The brutality used to be rather 
encouraged. The more brutal you could be 
the better you were esteemed. Now you 
see why the ballot is such an advance; people
can honestly express their views without this 
personal violence." </p>

<p>"Is it quite safe for Martial?" asked Felise, 
anxious about him; the roar of the surging 
crowd seemed to threaten kim most, because 
it was of him she thought. </p>

<p>"Not the least danger at present." </p>

<p>"I wish he would leave the platform," said 
Felise. ' I do not like it; these people seem 
as if they would crush anyone who displeased 
them." </p>

<p>Ostensibly the meeting had been called for 
two objects: first, for the formation of a 
Society for the Encouragement of Art 
Culture in the Homes of the Poor; secondly, 
for the presentation of a testimonial to Corn- 
leigh Cornleigh, Esq., on the completion of 
his twenty-fifth year of Parliamentary service. 
In reality it was the commencement of a 
series of operations designed to raise up and 
unite the supporters of Cornleigh Cornleigh, 
and the cause he represented. </p>

<p>It had long been felt in the select circle
that worked the party thereabouts that some- 
thing must be done. A certain amount of 
apathy had manifested itself even among 
the farmers; they did not exactly say so, 
but they seemed to lay the losses and in 
some cases the ruin that had overtaken them 
at the door of the landowners, and to the 
Toryism they represented. Enthusiasm was 
absent; there was a coldness among the 
sturdiest of them. A race remarkable for 
loyalty even to a bad cause or to a bad 
man, they stood somewhat aloof. </p>

<p>Speeches had been made by some of 
them of an advanced character, not at all 
of a resigned and praise-the-authorities-that- 
be description. Something must be done to 
stir them up, to get them together and talk 
to them. Much is sometimes accomplished 
by getting people together and talking to 
them. </p>

<p>Besides encouraging their own ranks, there 
was still harder work to be carried out 
amonq^ the small voters, who had much in- </p>



<p>creased in the neighbourhood of the town; 
there was the terrible Ballot Act to be counter- 
mined; and lastly, there was the enfranchise- 
ment of the agricultural labourer looming 
within ' measurable distance." </p>

<p>Mrs. Cornleigh Cornleigh was in high 
spirits at the success of her political manage- 
ment. A hint had been dropped, that owing 
to diminished income, the Squire thought 
of retiring from the representation at the 
next election, and this, too, on the eve of 
his baronetcy. The fourteen other magnates 
were much discomposed at this; there was 
no one among themselves with Cornleigh's 
prestige to take his place, and they did 
not want a stranger sent down by the 
London clubs; they naturally wished to 
keep the thing a close preserve. Accord- 
ingly purses were opened more freely than 
could have been expected, and a guarantee 
fund was formed; besides which an additional 
amount was subscribed for immediate political 
or politico-social work. </p>

<p>"We want to get into the houses of the 
working-classes and of the labourers," said 
Letitia. ' We want to lift up their ideas, 
to raise their aspirations. Let us begin with 
Art." </p>

<p>The proposed Society for the Encourage- 
ment of Art Culture in the Homes of the 
Poor was to furnish the labourer's cottage 
with an approved selection of prints and 
engravings from the works of the great 
masters, together with water-colours executed 
by members of the organization. The latter 
idea proved a great bait, and attracted all 
the amateurs in the town; every lady who 
dabbled in paint looked forward to seeing 
her picture hung at an exhibition that was 
presendy to be held in the house of Cornleigh 
Cornleigh. </p>

<p>Of all the odd movements that have been 
started in the last few years, this for orna- 
menting the cottage with works of art is 
the most grotesque. To suppose thai any 
man is likely to be the better because a
picture is graciously hung on his walls above 
the heads of squalling children, and over 
the table scarcely supplied with bread, is 
indeed a monstrous perversion of common- 
sense. </p>

<p>Unless he be a slave-man out of whom 
poverty has ground all independence, he is 
much more likely to curse it, to tear it 
down and trample it under foot, and to 
abominate the name of Art as synonymous 
with insult ever afterwards. </p>

<p>Insult it is of the cruellest and harshest 
kind. The wretched beings require food, 
and you give them a picture. </p>

<p>Felise gave old Abner Brown half-a-crown 
to purchase himself a beefsteak and a quart 
of good ale; that is to say, to buy himself 
fresh blood to circulate in those old and 
withered limbs. </p>

<p>Good beef and beer are what the poor 
want, and you would find it difficult to supply 
too much of it. </p>

<p>But somehow or other your modern phil- </p>

<p>anthropist cannot endure the idea of beef 
and beer. </p>

<p>He organizes societies to teach the poor 
how to cook (ye gods, how to cook! with 
nothing in the frying-pan nor any lard to 
grease it), and offers them a cold drink from 
the pump. I n the midst of squalHng children, 
over the deal table scarce supplied with bread, 
he hangs up a picture. </p>

<p>For the enjoyment of art it is first of 
all necessary to have a full belly. </p>

<p>May I inquire, too, of any painter, if such 
chances to light on these pages, whether 
he would consider it likely to encourage a 
love of art merely to hang a picture on 
a wall? whether he has not known even 
well educated and wealthy people who 
possessed scores of valuable pictures with- 
out the least love of art? whether, in short, 
even he, a painter of pictures, considered 
pictures the whole end and aim of art? </p>

<p>Is not art rather in the man than on the 
wall? </p>



<p>Once now and then I have been into the 
cottages of farm labourers (who had the good 
fortune to possess security of tenure) and 
found old oak furniture; curious grotesque 
crockery, generally much coloured — the 
favourite colour red; ancient brazen-faced 
upright clocks ticking slowly, as the stars 
go slowly past in the quiet hours of night; 
odd things on the mantelpiece; an old 
gun with brass fittings, polished brass orna- 
ments; two or three old books with leather 
bindings; on the walls quaint smoke-tinted 
pictures three-score years old. </p>

<p>Outside, trees in the garden — plums, pears, 
damsons — trees planted by the owner for 
fruit and shade, but mostly for solace, since 
it is a pleasant thing to see a tree grow. 
These people, having no fear of being turned 
out of doors, had accumulated such treasures, 
a chair at a time, making the interior home- 
like. And out of doors they had planted 
trees; without love of trees, I doubt if there 
be any art. Of art itself in itself they had
had no thought; not one had ever tried to 
draw or paint. They had coloured their 
strips of flower-garden or bordering with 
bright yellow flowers; that was all the paint 
they knew. </p>

<p>Yet I think this home-life in itself was 
something like true art. There was a sense 
of the fitness of things, and good in- 
stinctive taste in the selection of interior 
fittings, furniture, and even of colour. </p>

<p>Oak is our national wood, old oak, dark 
and deep-shaded — Rembrandt oak — oak is 
part of our national art. Brass polishes and 
gleams in sunlight through the window, or 
glows in the sparkle from winter's fire. It 
sets off the black oak. Red-coloured china- 
ware (perhaps it is a shade of pink) is gay and 
bright under low-pitched ceilings with dark 
wood beams and no white ceiling. Yellow 
flowers light up the brown mould. Altogether 
a realistic picture painted in actual dark oak, 
actual brass, actual red china, and actual 
yellow flowers. </p>



<p>Here then there was art in the man. Can 
you put that taste in by hanging a picture on 
the wall? Letitia's pictures were chiefly of 
the pre-Raphaelite ecclesiastical order — saints, 
saints" lives and deaths, such as were painted 
in the fourteenth century, and with which 
life at the present day has no sort of 
sympathy. </p>

<p>There was not a cottage-tenant on the 
estate of Cornleigh Cornleigh who could call 
his cottage his own securely for more than 
six months. How then was it possible for 
taste to grow up, or to exercise itself if it 
was there? </p>

<p>There can be no art in a people who know 
that at any moment they may be thrust out 
of doors. Art is of slow growth. </p>

<p>Up in the north they say there is a district 
where the labourers spend their idle hours in 
cuttinq- out and stickinof tocfether fiddles. 
I do not care twopence for a fiddle as a 
fiddle; but still I think if a labouring man 
coming home from plough, and exposure to
rough wind, and living on coarse fare, can 
still have spirit enough left to sit down and 
patiently carve out bits of maple wood and 
fit them together into a complete and tun- 
able fiddle, then he must have within him 
some of the true idea of art, and that fiddle is 
in itself a work of art. </p>

<p>Nothing of the sort will ever be possible 
in our cottage homes till the people in them 
know that they can live therein as long as 
they please provided they pay the rent, and 
arc not liable to be ordered off into the next 
county or anywhere because they have dis- 
pleased some one. </p>

<p>However, the movement in Maasbury had 
proved a social success; it was already well 
patronized; there were many amateurs up in 
the gallery who had begun to study for the 
honour of exhibiting in the house of Corn- 
lei^jh Cornleicrh. </p>

<p>Looking down upon the crowd in the hall 
from the gallery, it did not appear to care 
much for art — which is quiet. The hubbub
increased, and the jostling was renewed at 
short intervals; the meeting was impatient 
and wanted things to begin. </p>

<p>The first speakers in nowise concern us; 
they were heard sometimes with cheers, and 
now and then with hoots; they explained the 
general organization of the Society. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2>

<p>|T length Cornleigh Cornleigh rose
and said: 
* Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gende- 
mcn, — Upon this very important occasion, I 
— I — hum — ha ['think," whispered the family 
solicitor behind him] — I think — the — ah — the 
[" sympathies," whisper] sympathies of all 
right-minded persons, to whichever party they 
[hear, hear! — hoo, hoo ! ' Hoo, hoo !" will do 
for groans — modern meetings do not groan, 
they ' hoo, hoo!'] There is no doubt that in 
the future of this great country [hear, hear!] 
— textile fabrics very important — commercial 
interest — depend on knowledge of colour — 
education of the eye — practical value — I — I
think — hum — ha — ha — that is [" competition," 
whisper] — enable us to compete successfully 
with foreign artists, traders — manufacturers — 
they should be able to choose the right 
form, the right hue, and the right place. 
[Hear, hear!] Connection between agricul- 
ture and commerce now — now [" admitted," 
whisper] — admitted, and the depression of 
farming [hear, hear!] seen to be injurious, and 
to — to [" react," whisper] — react upon trade 
as in this town no doubt [hear, hear! from 
the tradesmen] — most sincerely hope the worst 
time past — the spending classes restricted — 
money — circulation, disastrous — disastrous 
to working men. [Hoo, hoo, hoo!] The 
object of this Society is to elevate the artistic 
ideas of the agricultural labourer [hear, 
hear! — hoo, hoo !] — contemplation of art — re- 
quire surroundings — support art manufacture. 
But incomparably the — the — the — hum — ha 
[" highest influence," whisper] — the highest 
effect — influence — art is on the moral and 
social well-being of the community, and I, </p>

<p>for one, Mr. Chairman, shall be delighted to 
forward the movement to the utmost of my 
power. [Hear, hear!] This is not a political 
meeting [hoo, hoo, hoo!], else I might be 
tempted to address you. In anticipation of 
the course of Parliamentary discussion — not 
a good plan — stupid to — I mean awkward — 
before subject well-threshed out. Still [hear, 
hear! — hoo, hoo !] — still [hear, hear ! — hoo, 
hoo!] — still [hear, hear ! — hoo, hoo, hoo !] 
But [hear, hear! — hoo, hoo !] — may be 
permitted, as appealing to the grand sym- 
pathies of Englishmen — Englishmen — to 
allude in the briefest possible manner to 
innovation — I — hum — ha — ha — I — the 
[" From earliest times," whisper] — From 
earliest times the grand boast of the English- 
man has been freedom — freedom to express, 
and say what he likes, voting — open air — 
light of day [hear, hear!]— no sneaking be- 
hind anonymous [hear, hear!]— go to the poll 
like men— honest men [hear, hear!— hoo, 
hoo!]— there can be no doubt— I believe the
Ballot Act to be demoralizing in its action 
on the people who have hitherto been 
accustomed — accustomed — I — ah — hum — 
[" atmosphere," whisper] — atmosphere of 
freedom! [Hear, hear ! — hoo, hoo !] The 
time is coming when that measure, so ob- 
noxious and so — I — I — [" injurious," whisper] 
— in its action — must be — repealed. [Hoo, 
hoo! — hear, hear ! — hoo, hoo — a rush towards 
the platform with difficulty repelled.] I — I — 
anxious to calm — I am sincerely desirous 
[hoo, hoo!] ever to promote the — the — ah — 
beneficial — and as I enjoy remarkable good 
health the late hours of the House of Com- 
mons not so — ah — ah — I — able to attend to 
my duties, and to vote [hoo, hoo!] — your 
interests — acknowledging your very kind re- 
ception, I — I — ah ' the speaker sat down
in the midst of a perfect howl of hear, hear! 
and hoo, hoo! </p>

<p>This was a very long and successful speech 
for Cornleigh Cornleigh. He delivered it by 
bending his body forwards at each sentence
and jerking the words out — throwing them 
across the hall. The speech had been written 
for him by Letitia, and was well expressed in 
the draft; but his memory, which retained 
the principal words, forgot the connecting 
links. </p>

<p>There was a great uproar as he concluded, 
and one man in the crowd wished to mount 
the platform and address the meeting on the 
Ballot; but this the chairman would not 
permit, on the pretext that the assemblage 
was non-political. A rush was again made 
and repelled; suddenly the chairman asked 
for a show of hands, and some resolution or 
other was declared carried. A storm of 
hisses came from near the doorway, met 
with cries of ' Turn them out!" </p>

<p>Cornleigh did not appear to hear the dis- 
turbance. He sat near the chairman in full 
view of all, his hands folded, his eyes cast 
down; the most marked point about him was 
the red silk handkerchief projecting from his 
breast-pocket. It would have been difficult
to decide whether the utter quietude of his 
attitude and expression was due to insensi- 
bility, to mere incapacity, or to studied 
purpose. Cornleigh was inscrutable. </p>

<p>Felise saw Cornleigh's solicitor (and 
prompter) place a piece of paper in Martial's 
hand. Martial seemed to remonstrate and 
wish to return it; but it was pressed upon 
him. </p>

<p>The Society being now formally established, 
next came the presentation proceedings. The 
Vicar of Maasbury advanced and began to 
speak with the volubility of his order. They 
had all known the House of Cornleigh [A 
voice: ' Too long !'] — it was established in the 
midst of them, and was endeared to them 
all by a thousand deeds of kindness and 
sympathy; it was interlaced with the pro- 
sperity of the town at large; it was inter- 
woven with the progress of every individual 
inhabitant. For seven hundred years the 
House of Cornleigh [" What good have 'em 
done all that time?'J had dwelt in their midst
[* Who shut up the park?'], and they were all 
proud of the historic interest conferred upon 
the place by that ancient mansion. [" Who 
stopped up the road?'] In all that lapse of 
time there was not on record a single instance 
of their refusing to assist and to lead with 
all their prestige movements valuable to the 
people, or to the trade and manufacture of 
the town. [" Who buys all their grocery in 
London?'] That beautiful — that noble — that 
magnificent new parish church of which they 
were all so proud [" Where's the old church?" 
' Where's the old bones?" * Who built a stable 
in the churchyard?'] owed its origin to the 
initiation of a lady, to mention whose name 
was at once sufficient [hoo — hoo! — ' The grey 
mare!'] to secure the heartiest applause. 
[Hoo, hoo, hoo!] Were he to recount but 
one half of what the family of Cornleigh had
accomplished for the benefit of Maasbury
[Hoo, hoo, hoo! — hear, hear, hear! — two 
rushes and several free fights.] But the im- 
mediate object of his addressing them that
afternoon was to recall to their memories — 
if indeed it wanted recalling, if it was not 
fresh in their minds — to recall to their 
memories the services Edward Cornleigh 
Cornleigh had rendered to them, to the 
town, to the neighbourhood, to agriculture, 
and to the country at large by his long, 
patient, and laborious attendance in the 
House of Commons as their representative. 
[Hear, hear! — hear, hear ! The Cornleigh 
party yelled till they overcame the hooting 
for once.] Fortunately for them Mr. Corn- 
leigh was peculiarly fitted for Parliamentary 
duties, being blessed with remarkably good 
health [" So are cows!'], which good 
health he devoted with unremitting and dis- 
interested assiduity to the service of his 
constituency. [Oh, oh!] There was reason 
to believe that this unremitting attention 
would, in a short time, receive a reward 
[" Yah! my Lady Letitia !'] by no means equal 
to the efforts he had made, but sufficient 
nevertheless to cast a reflected lustre over the
constituency which had returned him for five- 
and-tvventy years. [" And won't do it again!'] 
Some persons of a flippant turn of mind were 
easily captured with long speeches — with 
mere wind and bombast — but men of a right 
way of thinking valued actions, valued deeds, 
beyond the mere piling of words upon words. 
The manner in which Mr. Cornleigh had sat 
through the wearisome debates, the manner 
in which he had recorded his vote [" Against 
everything any good of!'] — these patient 
actions far surpassed the vain ambitions of 
talkative politicians. [Hear, hear! — hear, 
hear! — free fio^hts — a hat thrown on the 
platform.] Sufficient notice, indeed, could not 
be taken of this noble exception to the 
current vice of the day — the vice of self- 
advertisement — the talk, talk, talking of one's 
self into observation. [" He'd talk if he 
could!'] It was no wonder that the sub- 
scriptions to the testimonial had proved so 
large — no wonder that it had extended far 
beyond the expectations of the most sanguine, </p>



<p>when they looked back in this way upon the 
services of Mr. Cornleigh to the town and to 
agriculture. [Hear, hear! from the compact 
body of tenant-farmers.] Around the town 
of Maasbury there reached a wide domain — 
the domain of the House of Cornleigh, which, 
under their fostering care, had reached a 
pitch of cultivation rarely seen. [Cheers 
from the tenant-farmers.] Upon that domain 
they saw smiling homesteads in the midst of 
trees, or under the hills, surrounded with 
corn and grass lands, with groups of cattle 
in the fields and well-paid labourers [hoo, 
hoo! — hoo, hoo!] ; and they saw fields drained 
and in the utmost order — they saw the smoke 
curling upwards from the peaceful villages, so 
contented and prosperous under Mr. Corn- 
leigh's rule — a rule which was a happy 
mingling of lenity and severity, such as a 
good parent displayed. [Oh, oh! ' Pull him 
down!" 'Robert Godwin!" Hiss! Robert 
was on the platform.] When they saw these 
things they realised the blessing of a land- </p>

<p>lord [hoo, hoo, hoo!] — they realised the 
blessing of a system of land-ownership 
which it was now so madly desired to destroy 
— a system which enabled a benevolent and 
clear-sighted man to arbitrate in all cases of 
dispute, to eliminate seeds of discord, and to 
create around him a fortunate, a happy, and 
a contented tenantry. [Hear, hear! — hear, 
hear! The tenant-farmers howled their 
loudest applause.] But not content with 
what he and his predecessors had ac- 
complished, Mr, Cornleigh, ably assisted by 
his talented and beloved lady, desired to still 
farther extend the sphere of his usefulness 
and benevolence by entering into the cottage 
home, and placing upon the wall the images 
of those sainted men and women which the 
ofreatest masters of art had handed down to 
us, in order that the ploughman and the 
carter might enjoy privileges as great as 
those of the wealthiest, in order that they
might lift up their aspirations, in order
[Hear, hear! — hear, hear.] He would not
trespass longer upon them — he had to 
propose that a testimonial be presented to 
Edward Cornleigh Cornleigh, Esq., in recog- 
nition of his long and faithful service in 
Parliament, and of his devoted labours for 
the benefit of the town of Maasbury and of 
agriculture. [Hear, hear! — hoo, hoo!] </p>

<p>A still more violent attempt was made to 
storm the platform as the speaker concluded. 
It was frustrated by the compact body of 
tenants in the front, but the result of all this 
pushing was that the thin end of the w^edge 
had become much thickened. On the plat- 
form Robert Godwin had fixed his glance 
upon Martial somewhat in the same way as 
Rosa had fastened hers upon Felise. His 
colourless eyes, like those of a fish, never 
moved from Barnard. </p>

<p>"Look, Martial is going to speak!" said 
Felise. Martial had advanced to the edofe 
of the platform; at this even Rosa looked 
that way. In his hand he held a piece of 
paper; he had, in fact, been selected by the
solicitor to the House of Cornleigh to second 
the resolution moved by the last speaker. 
He had remonstrated, but they would take 
no denial. The largest tenant upon the 
estate was ill; it fell to him as the next on 
the roll to laud the House of Cornleigh. </p>

<p>He was cheered by the compact body of 
tenant-farmers in front; at the rear they 
did not know him, and shouted 'Who are 
you?" </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2>

<p>ENTLEMEN; said Martial in a 
faltering voice, nervously twist- 
ing- the piece of paper, ' this 
piece of paper has been put into my hands 
much against my will [* Speak up!'] — much 
against my will. [" Throw it down then!'] It 
contains the words in which I am to second 
the resolution. But I really feel — I do not 
wish — I am in an awkward position [" Go 
home to bed!'], you must understand. [" Yah ! 
Open your mouth," from the opposition. 
Hear, hear! * Let him speak ! Fair play — 
fair play!" from the tenant-farmers.] My 
private opinions, then, arc not — are not — I 
[Hear, hear! — hoo, hoo ! ' Why can't you say
what you mean?'] So I will, f^^entlemen," 
said Martial, his face Hushed, and his temper 
rising" and overcoming his nervousness; ' I 
will do as that gentleman recommends, I will 
say what I mean, which is the best thing to 
do after all. We have just listened to a long 
and I suppose we must call it an eloquent 
speech [hear, hear!], the burden of which 
was the great advantage we all derive — and 
especially agriculturists like myself — from the 
interest taken in us by Mr. Cornleigh, 
[Hear, hear! — hear, hear! from the tenant- 
farmers.] I suppose you all know I am a 
farmer. I will now give you a fact — not a 
speech but a fact — in illustration, or rather 
as a practical comment upon that eloquent 
speech. [Hear, hear! — hear, hear ! from 
the tenant-farmers.] Gentlemen, this after- 
noon before I entered this hall I posted a 
letter formally stating that I intended — that 
I was compelled — to give up my farm [sensa- 
tion], and of course that will be followed by 
a sale by auction of my stock and effects. </p>





<p>Gentlemen, I am ruined. Gentlemen, I do 
not believe I shall have fifty pounds over 
when the auction takes place. I beg 3'OU to 
receive this as a practical comment upon 
the eloquent speech to which you have just 
listened. [Hear, hear! — cheers from the 
opposition; tenant-farmers in dead silence ; 
whispering on the platform.] You will now 
understand why I shrank from seconding a 
resolution to the terms of which I could not 
conscientiously subscribe. [Hear, hear! — 
opposition cheers.] But as it has been 
forced upon me, I feel entitled to speak out. 
['Goon — go on! — hurrah!" tremendous op- 
position applause; dead silence among the 
tenant-farmers; agitation on the platform.] 
It was well — it was appropriate — it was 
fitting that the eloquent speech we have just 
heard should have been addressed to you by 
a person interested in maintaining a sub- 
sidised falsehood [shouts of applause from 
the opposition] — by a person interested in 
maintaining that huge octopus, the Church — </p>

<p>that huge octopus which saps with its in- 
numerable suckers the strength out of the 
land. It was well and it was fitting that the 
Church which takes our substance in its 
tithes should eloquently support the land- 
owner who takes our substance in rent. 
[Frantic applause from the opposition; hoots 
and yells from the tenant-farmers; another 
great push for the platform; free fights ; 
Robert Godwin conferring with the solicitor, 
Cornleigh's prompter.] Gentlemen, for long 
years past we have been suffering heavy 
losses from various causes which fall under 
two divisions, prominent in the first division 
being the inclement seasons and the enormous 
competition of America; for these no man is 
responsible, and I lay no blame at any man's 
door. In the second division of the causes 
which have increased the depression, there 
stands out in strong relief the high and dis- 
proportionate rents which we were compelled 
to pay in seasons of prosperity. There 
stands out in strong relief the tithes which
in seasons of prosperity and adversity alike 
we have been compelled to pay to the 
Church. These two together are more than 
equal to the incidence of competition and 
the failure of sunshine. In our years of pro- 
sperity the landlord forced from us the last 
shilling, so that we were unable to lay by 
savings for the future. When times of 
adversity came we had no reserve to meet 
them with. Tardily, very tardily, the land- 
lord has at length somewhat lowered his 
rent, but this relief has come too late; slight 
in itself, grudgingly given, it is too late. 
[Hear, hear! from the opposition.] But if 
the landlord has at last, under irresistible 
pressure — bear this in mind, under irresistible 
pressure and not from any benevolence — if 
at last he has reduced his rent, the Church 
has not reduced its rent. No, not one 
penny— not one penny — after all that it has 
received from the tenant-farmers in years 
gone by, the subscriptions, the moral and 
physical support — in our distress this Church, </p>

<p>which preaches kindness and consideration 
for others, has not abated one single penny, 
but has taken from our sides its pound of 
llesh. [Shouts from the opposition; shouts 
from the tenant-farmers, and indescribable 
uproar. Robert Godwin advanced and put 
his hand on Martial's shoulder, but Cornleigh's 
solicitor drew him back.] I repeat, its pound 
of flesh; for there are men whom I know, 
men with families, with growing sons and 
daughters, and with little children who have 
been forced, first to partially starve them- 
selves and their children, and finally to go 
forth penniless into the world. Let me ask 
you whether we ought to feel grateful? 
[Uproar and fighting. 'Pull him down!" 
from the tenant-farmers; ' Go on !" from the 
opposition.] Gentlemen, I do not hesitate 
to denounce the whole system as a cruel 
farce. [" Pull him down!" from the tenants.] 
We have often, very often, at our public 
dinners and meetings, heard persons get up 
and make eloquent speeches, attributing
every species of benevolence to our landlords 
and to our landlords" agents. [* Robert God- 
win!" hoo, hoo, hoo! from the opposition.] 
The truth, as we all know, is exactly the 
reverse. In return for our loyalty they have 
oppressed us, and, I will add, they have 
insulted us in every possible manner. We 
have been less than dogs [" Pull him down!" 
from the tenant-farmers]; we have been ex- 
pected to cringe with our hats off [hiss, hiss! 
from the tenant-farmers: 'Let him speak!" 
' Fair play; fair play !" from the opposition] ; 
we have been expected to look down humbly 
and to be only too thankful to be noticed, 
like a dog you pat with your hand [hoo, 
hoo, hoo! from the tenant-farmers. Angry 
cries from the opposition: ' Let him speak, or 
we'll drive everyone off the platform!'] ; we 
have been expected to kow-tow to our land- 
lords, and not only to them, but to all their 
agents, friends, and hangers-on; to stand 
hat in hand before their parsons, and before 
their solicitors, and before their stewards, </p>

<p>and before their gardeners and their game- 
keepers — before their very grooms! I deeply 
regret to say — the truth is forced from me — 
gentlemen, I deeply regret to own to you 
that a very large proportion of farmers have 
consented to this kow - towing, this hat- 
touching, this contemptible humility. [Yells 
from the tenant-farmers, who made an effort 
to tear Barnard from the platform, but were 
pulled back by the opposition: fighting and 
hard blows exchanged; at length comparative 
quiet.] The very memory of it fills me with 
disgust; such servility has probably never 
been equalled on the part of free men — such 
servility as that exhibited by the mass of 
farmers to their landlord's circle, down to his 
very gardener! But why was there this 
servility? Does anyone suppose that farmers 
humiliated themselves In this manner of their 
own free will? No, indeed. The guilt — 
for it is nothincr less than cfuilt — lies with the 
landlords, who, through their agents, forced 
us to this infamy. [Hear, hear! from the
Opposition; cheers and counter-cheers.] I 
say " guilt," because it is a criminal thing to 
force a man to part with his own self-respect. 
[Cheers and uproar.] Either bow the knee 
and touch the hat — either do as we bid you, 
vote as we please, give up your very 
conscience — either bow the knee and touch 
your hat or leave your farm. [" Shame!" cheers 
and yelling.] We have been asked by a 
clergyman in an eloquent speech to acknow- 
ledge the advantages we have derived from 
a landlord. I ask you again whether you 
think we have reason to be grateful? ['No, 
no!" cheers ; hoo-hooing from the tenant- 
farmers.] Gentlemen, I cannot express my 
astonishment that a member of a Church which 
professes to hold a falsehood as an abomina- 
tion [cheers] can have the cool assurance to 
stand here in the light of day and deliver 
statements so absolutely at variance with 
fact. [Agitation on the platform; Robert 
Godwin held back by the solicitor.] I tell 
you — and you are, most of you, aware of the
fact yourselves — that there does not exist a 
race of free men on the face of the earth who 
have been so completely under the thumb as 
farmers. There are many tenants of jNlr. 
Cornleigh's here this afternoon. There is 
not one of these who would dare, were voting 
not now secret under the Ballot Act, to vote 
contrary to Mr. Cornleigh's wishes. [Uproar 
— savage blows exchanged; Robert Godwin 
seizes Martial by the shoulder; excited cries, 
' Let him alone — let him speak!" Martial 
shakes Robert off roughly.] You see how 
much liberty — you see we should not be 
allowed even to speak! [Cheers.] Till the 
Ballot Act was passed not a farmer dared to 
vote contrary to his landlord's opinion; I 
warn you all that the Ballot Act is not 
perfect; the secrets of voting are allowed to 
leak out, and pressure is still put on. I warn 
you of this! I say that the man who discloses 
the secret of another man's vote, deserves as 
severe a punishment as is awarded to perjury. 
Hear, hear! from the opposition; uproar from
the tenant-farmers.] We hear very much 
nowadays of this or that landlord having 
reduced rent, or having returned ten, twenty, 
or thirty per cent, at audit. This is generous 
indeed, is it not? For the very same land 
has fallen in value fifty per cent. — an acre 
that was worth ^70 is now hardly worth /^2>5> 
and in fact you cannot get a purchaser at all. 
What better proof could there be that the 
letting value must have depreciated equally? 
We know that the trade and commerce of 
this country are declining; it is traced to the 
depression of farming, and who is responsible 
for the depression of farming? [Shouts of 
' Cornleigh, Cornleigh!'] Now let us kow- 
tow and bend the knee and touch the hat to 
our landlords" grooms and gardeners, 
stewards, solicitors, agents, and sycophants. 
[Uproar.] We hear now of landlords seeking 
tenants; using every blandishment, offering 
every advantage — even the shooting — fancy, 
permission to shoot! — lowering rents, and 
doing everything possible to attract tenants
now they find their rent-rolls diminishing and 
their cash disappearing. Was there ever 
anything more despicable? To grind us and 
oppress us, to insult us and ride over us in 
their time of prosperity; and now to fawn on 
us and treat us as equals, to beckon to us, 
and to hope to get over us with such manifesta- 
tions of affection! [Cheers from the oppo- 
sition; groans from the tenant - farmers.] 
The whole thing is a farce, a disgraceful 
farce and national shame [cheers, met with 
frantic yelling from the farmers]; a disgrace- 
ful farce — I am disgusted with it — I see you 
are disgusted with it — every man of common- 
sense in the country is disgusted with it. 
There never will be any more prosperity in 
English agriculture till the entire system is 
revised; till a man can cultivate the land 
free from vexatious hindrances, mediaeval 
hindrances, superstitious hindrances, and 
burdens such as tithes, ordinary and extra- 
ordinary; till there be nothing to contend 
against but the seasons and the honest
competition of the United States. I am 
thankful to say I have done with it. To me 
it is not so serious a matter as it is to many. 
I am young; I can work [cheers from the 
opposition]; if need be, I can emigrate to 
those United States. But it is a bitter thing 
to older men thus forced from their home- 
steads. To me, too, it will be a bitter thing 
to quit the old home where I was born, 
where my father lived, where my grandfather 
lived, with which all my associations are 
bound up; but there will be one great com- 
pensation for me — from this afternoon I have 
done with the landlord's agent; I have done 
with the steward, with the solicitor, with 
the parson, with the gardener and the game- 
keeper; I have done with the groom, and 
the whole circle of despicable sycophants!" </p>

<p>Tremendous cheering and groaning, in the 
midst of which Martial got off the platform 
into the crowd. Fclisc drew her breath, 
for to her it seemed that in the surging mass 
he was knocked to and fro like a tennis-ball. </p>

<p>The opposition helped him towards the 
door; the tenant-farmers pushed and struggled 
and struck to crush him, hooting their loudest 
at the man who had expressed the very- 
thoughts in their own hearts. He got 
out at last without hurt, having lost his hat; 
his coat, having been torn open violently, was 
split. At the foot of the gallery staircase 
he found Mr. Goring and Felise; he had 
to buy a new hat before they started for 
Beechknoll. The meeting continued for 
some time, and several speeches were made; 
but the testimonial was declared to be voted 
unanimously. </p>

<p>'It is the first time the truth has been 
spoken in Maasbury since — since the 
Crusades," said Mr. Goring, as they drove 
homewards. ' Did you notice Cornleigh i^" </p>

<p>"I never thought of him — personally," said 
Martial. ' It was the whole system I thought 
of." </p>

<p>"Well, there he sat demurely all the time, 
with that faint scarce perceptible smile on
his face. I wonder whether it is conceic 
or stupidity — his hands folded, and looking 
down in the same innocent manner as if 
it did not concern him in the least?" </p>

<p>"Are you quite sure you are not hurt?" said 
Felise. </p>

<p>* My shoulder is bruised a little — nothing 
else." </p>

<p>Presently they saw in the distance the 
village church by which Mary Shaw was 
buried. </p>

<p>"Could there be anything more grotesque 
— more hideous in its mockery?" said Mr. 
Goring, ' than to hang up pictures in cot- 
tages, and Mary lying there for want of a 
home?" </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2>

<p>FEW days afterwards Felise 
started early in the morning to 
meet Martial. She was half an 
hour before the usual time; she was restless 
and anxious, and could not wait. There 
was no definite cause for her anxiety — it 
was a vague feeling of uneasiness, traceable 
in a great measure to the unhappy death 
of Mary. By that sudden loss her con- 
fidence in the future had been shaken. </p>

<p>Till some sharp sorrow comes we look 
forward frankly, and never question the 
certainty that to-morrow will bring the same 
settled and pleasant circumstances which 
surround us to-day. </p>



<p>Her confidence in the future was shaken. 
Martial was hers now — but to-morrow? </p>

<p>Mary had only left the house an hour, 
when under the uncontrollable impulse of 
her secret unhappiness she leaped into the 
mill-pool. </p>

<p>Felise could not bear Martial to be away 
from her; so lonof as he was near, her heart 
was at peace; the instant he was gone, her 
uneasiness returned. She could not wait 
till the usual time, but started too soon. </p>

<p>There was also the thought that now 
Martial had given up his farm, in a little 
while he would leave his house, and would 
perhaps go from her for months — no one 
could say for how long. </p>

<p>The brook by which she walked flowed 
on through the meadow, now with its waters 
level with the sward, now deep between 
steep banks where the current had worn 
away the earth. Sometimes a blackbird 
rushed out from under a hawthorn-bush at 
her approach; the blackbird loves the water
always, and most of all in the warm August 
days. Now and again the breeze rusded the 
green flags, tipped with brown, and the 
tall reeds in the corner seemed to advance 
and step towards her as they bowed. Felise 
walked musing by the brook, dreaming in 
the sunshine, through the shadow of the; 
willows and alders, by the purple loosestrife 
lifting its spires almost to her hand, by the 
green rushes where the furrow came to the 
stream. </p>

<p>Far, far up in the azure there were thin 
wisps of white cloud idling motionless in the 
air, flecks such as a painter might throw 
from his brush; and between them yet more 
faint and extended webs of vapour. It 
was hardly cloud — it was thistledown cloud — 
so fine, delicate, and vanishing, the eye could 
scarcely trace the lines and pencilling on 
the sky. </p>

<p>Less brilliantly white because it passed 
through these, the sunshine fell softly upon
the aftermath — on the short grass; and in
'> •- t
the brook, looking down from the high bank, 
she saw the image of the sun, shorn of 
his dazzling rays, reflected in the water. </p>

<p>The heat was not so overwhelming, the 
light not so fiery and white-hot; the breeze 
which blew at times came almost cool, and 
the rustling of the flags sounded dreamily. 
A softness and repose had settled on the 
aftermath and on the stubble; there was 
haze in the distance, and the masses of elm 
foliage were rounded and smooth. </p>

<p>The cawing of the rooks going over scarce 
disturbed the silence of the morning; there 
was a tone of complacent rest in their calls 
to each other. Nothing was quick or 
suofSfested haste but the ' hist-hist ' of a 
wood-pigeon's wings cleaving the air with 
vehement strokes. </p>

<p>Flags and tall grasses and green things, 
growing down to the water's edge and 
encroaching on the bank, hid the forget-me- 
nots under their tangled cover. </p>

<p>Once asfain the shadow was idle on the
dial; Time was idle, drowsy in summer indo- 
lence. </p>

<p>Away in the stubble women were gleaning, 
gathering ears of wheat from among the 
streaked convolvulus and the pale field vero- 
nica. A sound of pastoral things stays in the 
word * gleaning;" yet It is the most aching of 
labours — stoop, stoop, stoop. They laboured 
and sought the ears of wheat while the 
summer was slumbering around them. </p>

<p>Love lingered by the brook and watched 
the running water, touching the reeds and 
letting them slip through the fingers, pausing 
to gather a flower, and then in the act sparing 
it. Let it bloom; do not injure a flower; 
let it stay in the sunshine by the running 
stream. </p>

<p>All things seem possible in the open air. </p>

<p>By the water some part of her old faith 
returned to her. The voice of the sunshine 
was hope; in the breeze there was a soothing 
reassurance; a swallow flew before her, 
following the windinq: brook low over the
sward, and thought shot forward swifter 
than he. </p>

<p>There are moments when the earth is 
so beautiful that sorrow seems a dream. It 
cannot be — it is not real, this regret; we 
have fancied it, or surely the sun would 
not shine, the water sparkle like this. To 
the beautiful, sadness is unknown — it is not 
in its sphere; is this why we instinctively 
cling to loveliness? </p>

<p>He had said that he could not love her; 
yet by the running water, in the soft light 
of the cloud-shaded sunshine, she felt that 
it was not true: he would love her, he 
must love. Some day he must love her. </p>

<p>So by the stream and through the wood- 
lands Felise came to the old barn, and sat 
down under the chestnut-tree. A jackdaw 
Hew from it, calling 'jack-jack-daw" as he 
passed over the ridge of yellow-red tiles. In 
a minute or two she got up — she had sat 
down opposite the cavernous space where 
the doors of the barn had been — and went
round the tree and sat down so as to have 
it between her and the barn. Either there 
had been some sHght scarce perceptible 
movement of somethinq^ in the barn, or the 
shadow had deepened, or her imagination, 
more nervous than usual, fancied it. Of 
course it was nothing- — she would have 
laughed at the idea of the barn being haunted; 
yet she went round and sat down behind 
the chestnut. </p>

<p>Almost immediately a hand was placed 
on her shoulder; she started, and, as happens 
in sudden alarm, her lips parted. Before 
she could cry out a handkerchief was thrust 
between her teeth, choking the sound in 
her throat. A loop of stout cord descended 
round her shoulders and was drawn tight 
effectually pinioning her arms. Savage 
force was used to throw her on the ground, 
and the cord rapidly wound round and round 
her body to her ankles till she lay swathed 
in rope. So swifdy was it done that she was 
helpless before she recognised Robert Godwin. </p>



<p>He knew her strength; it would have 
been difficult even for him, powerful as he was, 
to have mastered her in fair wrestling: at 
least it would have taken time — there would 
have been a struggle. </p>

<p>But the sudden gag in her mouth not 
only prevented her crying out, it seemed 
for the moment to stop her breath; she 
was, too, sitting down, a position unfavour- 
able to effort. The loop of rope fastened 
her arms; she was thrown and bound, at 
his mercy. </p>

<p>Roughly turning her over and over to 
wind the cord about her, he had not recked 
that her beautiful face must touch the earth. 
Now she lay as he had left her on her 
back, extended at full length; there were 
marks where a root had pressed into the 
soft cheek, and a dry leaf adhered to her 
forehead. Her hat had fallen off — her head 
was bare. </p>

<p>From below the shoulder to her ankles 
she was wrapped in a spiral of rope, prevent- </p>

<p>ing all movement of her limbs; she could 
lift her head, her limbs were powerless. </p>

<p>An undulation — a wave of muscular exer- 
tion went along her form; with all her 
strength she strove to burst the cords. 
They would not yield; her breast heaved — 
her torso seemed to enlarge as she inflated 
her chest, and setting her shoulders firmly, 
arched her back and lifted herself, suspended 
between the neck and the feet. Twice the 
undulation passed along her form — twice 
she raised herself on her neck and heels, 
the body suspended between — arched — and 
with her limbs pressed outwards against her 
bonds. All the strength of her beautiful 
torso — all the strength inhaled upon the 
hills — was put forth in those great efforts; 
the rope stretched, but would not give way. 
Then she lay still and looked up at God- 
win. </p>

<p>His face, usually so black, was blanched 
to a ghastly paleness — a paleness behind 
which the dark and sombre expression still
remained. Without a word he rushed inside 
the barn and brought out Ruy, who had 
been tethered to the broken plough inside. </p>

<p>The reflex action — the brooding — had 
done this. It was his duty to punish 
her. </p>

<p>The evil thought had grown in his mind 
— all her conduct had strengthened his belief 
that she was Martial's mistress. </p>

<p>His unapproachable idol had degraded 
herself — she must be punished — her beauty 
must be broken as idols were broken. Not 
in revenge for her loving another, but 
because she had destroyed her ideal self. 
She was guilty of crime against herself, and 
that beauty which she had debased must 
be ground out of her face for ever with 
Ruy's iron hoof
Her lover's horse — the horse she had fed 
and petted; yes, under Ruy's hoof her beauty 
should perish. One stamp of that hoof and 
the lovely mould of her features would become 
indistinguishable. To kill her was nothing; </p>

<p>he did not intend that, but that she should 
Hve in her crushed shame. </p>

<p>There could have been no more distinct 
proof of his insanity than his thinking to 
break the mould without inflicting death, 
for Ruy's weight would press down the very 
brain. </p>

<p>For this chance he had watched morning 
after morning; but Martial had come too 
soon, or she had sat looking towards his 
place of ambush — some little circumstance 
had delayed him. It was his or Ruy's 
movements in the shadow that Felise had 
seen. </p>

<p>Holding the bridle, he stood a moment 
and looked down upon the captive. </p>

<p>One glance of intolerable indignation shot 
from her eyes; then she lifted her head 
and looked towards the wood — looking for 
Martial. </p>

<p>He understood, and drew Ruy forward; 
the horse hesitated to advance, seeing her 
on the ground almost under him. At the
trampling of his hoofs she turned her head 
again, and comprehended what Godwin in- 
tended to do. Her features flushed — it was 
the suppression of the cry which her gagged 
lips endeavoured to utter. </p>

<p>Godwin pulled at the bridle. Ruy came 
up till his hoof cut the sward within a few 
inches of her ear, but would not step farther. 
Godwin struggled with the horse and tugged 
at the bridle. Ruy drew back; for the third 
time the man conquered and dragged him to 
her. </p>

<p>In that moment the undulation passed 
along her form, and she struggled to roll 
over — to shield her face, to turn it to the 
ground. Godwin put his foot upon her chest, 
and pressing firmly prevented her. Dragging 
at the bridle he had aroused Ruy's temper; 
Ruy jerked his head and would not come. 
Godwin paused and took out his pocket-knife, 
intending to stab the horse and drive him by 
sudden pain over her. </p>

<p>His foot pressed heavily on her chest. </p>

<p>She raised her head; she saw a quick some- 
thing pass through the air; it was in itself 
invisible, yet something passed; there was a 
sharp report, and she fainted. </p>

<p>The bullet struck Ruy by the temple; he 
staggered back, reared, and fell ov^er on his 
side. By main strength Martial dragged 
Felise away along the ground, lest the last 
plunging kicks of the horse should strike 
her; but Ruy did not turn after he fell — he 
was dead almost instantly. Robert had 
rushed from the spot at the sound of the 
rifle. </p>

<p>The little Lancaster oval-bore from which 
the shot had been fired lay among the thistles 
at the edge of the copse where Martial had 
dropped it. Emerging from the wood as he 
came to meet Felise, he saw Godwin's foot 
upon her breast and the horse angrily jerking 
at his bridle. A shout died on his lips, and 
the rifle came up to his shoulder. As Robert 
took out his knife the tube was levelled, and 
in another instant the ball would have crashed
through his brain. But Martial's good genius, 
at the instant his finger felt the trigger, caused 
him to change his aim from the man to the 
horse; the tube scarcely moved a quarter of 
an inch, but that quarter of an inch made the 
entire difference. </p>

<p>In after-days he shuddered at the recollec- 
tion that in his anger and fear for Felise he 
might have shot Godwin; the deed might be 
justifiable, still it would have been homicide, 
and a weight on his mind for years. The 
mere change of his thought — a change effected 
in the hundredth part of a second — had saved 
him from this. </p>

<p>He cut the rope; he lifted her head ; he 
called upon her name. His kisses fell fast 
on her lips, and under those kisses she awoke 
to the consciousness of a stream of incoherent 
words full of one meaning — love. Passion 
poured upon her — a flood of love fell upon 
her heart. His trembling arms held her to 
his breast, his eyes swam with tears; she knew 
that he loved her, and her joy was supreme. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXVI</h2>

<p>XCEPT that the mark lingered on 
her cheek where the root had 
pressed against it, and that her 
h'mbs shook a Httle, FeHse sustained no 
injury. The shock and terror, great as it 
was, was overcome by the happiness which 
so quickly followed it. </p>

<p>Martial loved her. In his struggle with 
the water in the dark mill-pool, in his struggle 
with the stolidity and stupidity which are 
difficult as fate to overcome — when death 
drew near him he saw clearly how great and 
noble, how precious she was, how inestimable 
her love. Her value was made known to 
him with that distinctness of mental \ision
which comes in the last apparent moments of 
hfe. The thought that he should lose her 
was more bitter than death — so bitter, so 
keen that he thought not of death, but of his 
loss in it. From that instant he was hers; 
but yet even then his own peril had not 
forced him to admit that he himself loved 
her. He valued her — he did not love her. </p>

<p>But her peril changed all things. Instantly 
there fell from him the artificial restraints he 
had cultivated, and his heart burst forth. 
His passion, so long kept back, overcame 
him utterly. </p>

<p>In truth, he had loved her from the first. 
Not only her loveliness, but that indefinable 
personality which is stronger than beauty 
had seized upon his mind from the very 
beginning. Denying it to himself, fighting 
against it, lleeing from it, still it was there. 
Her peril forced him to own his passion. 
The past was utterly gone, and he worshipped 
her with all the fervour of his heart. </p>

<p>So overcome was he with the violence of
his emotion that instead of supporting her, 
she supported him. Her physical exhaustion 
disappeared quickly; his moral excitement 
could not subside. She held his head upon 
her breast; she soothed him ; she whispered 
gently; her strong arms were about him. </p>

<p>Once again they knew no Time. The 
shadow of the chestnut-tree swung slowly 
round; the doves came to the wood from the 
stubble; a blue kingfisher passed, going to 
the brook; the gleaners rested in the field. </p>

<p>When at last they moved homewards it 
was beyond noon; they walked through the 
woodlands beneath the shade, they stayed 
beneath the oaks, they lingered at the curves 
of the brook: the breeze whispered their love 
in the trees; the murmur of the water sang 
to them; to the sunshine their love gave a 
meaning. The swallow flew before, but just 
above the grass; their hearts were swilter 
than he to respond to each other's thought. </p>

<p>At home they had much to tell Mr. Goring 
of Godwin's insanity. He could scarcely credit
it, because he knew no reason for his mad- 
ness; paradox as it appears, this is correct — 
we instinctively search for a reason for mad- 
ness. While they talked in the little room, 
the window in which looked out on the 
garden, there was the sound of wheels, and a 
carriage stopped at the gate. In a moment 
Mr. Cornleigh Cornleigh was announced, and 
immediately afterwards entered; he carried a 
parcel under his arm. </p>

<p>* Morning, Goring," he said in his jerky 
disconnected way, bowing to Felise at the 
same time very politely. ' Fine weather — 
harvest — eh! Most of the corn got in about 
here — eh! Happened to be driving along 
the road — thought I would just call — excuse 
intrusion." </p>

<p>Mr. Goring put a chair for him, and the 
Squire seated himself comfortably, facing 
Felise. </p>

<p>"The fact is," continued Cornleigh, aware 
tliat they were waiting for him to explain, 
* I've some pictures here," undoing his parcel. </p>

<p>"Fine engravings — first-rate — high art — gn*at 
masters — raise their aspirations — labourers I 
mean. Were you at our meeting?" </p>

<p>'/was," said Martial meaningly. </p>

<p>Cornleigh did not apparently notice the 
remark. </p>

<p>*Want you to help us," continued Corn- 
leigh. handing one of the engravings to 
Mr. Goring. ' Distribute them, you know — 
worthy people; have heard you take great 
interest — charitable — so on. Really fine 
works," turning to Felise. 'Just look," 
spreading them on the table. Felise could 
not do less than advance and look at the 
engravings. </p>

<p>Of all the people in the world Cornleigh 
Cornleigh, Esq., was the last person Goring 
would have expected to call upon him. No 
one could ever quite fathom Cornleigh, but 
there was an explanation of this move. His 
political prompter — the family solicitor — a 
man of much broader knowledge of the world 
than Godwin, had advised him some time
since, in view of the next election, to en- 
deavour to gain over certain opponents by a 
little cheap attention. Amongst these was 
Goring. The political prompter understood 
human nature well. He knew that the 
bitterest and coarsest opponent is often only 
an opponent because he has not been noticed; 
wounded vanity and overwhelming conceit is 
often at the bottom of it. Let the Squire 
call, or Letitia, and half the enmity would 
vanish. He was right in nine out of ten 
cases; Mr. Goring was the tenth, and the 
exception. This at least was the pretext 
Cornleigh put forward to Letitia. </p>

<p>But perhaps Cornleigh, sitting so quiet 
and demurely looking downwards that day in 
the justice-room, had seen Felise; perhaps 
he had made inquiries; perhaps he had 
seized the first opportunity to call and see 
her, to speak with her, so opposite as she 
was to the lady whom the world cheerfully 
pronounced to be 'just the woman for Corn- 
leigh." </p>

<p>The engravings were really very good; 
Felise said so. </p>

<p>* Important to raise aspirations, you see,* 
said Cornleigh. * Textile fabrics ' (recurring 
to his speech), 'manufactures, trade — hum — 
ha — hum— supported by agriculture. Hope 
you will help us, Miss Goring." </p>

<p>* Mr. Cornleigh, I think the poor people 
need something to eat more than they do 
pictures," replied Felise. </p>

<p>"Heard you were very charitable," said 
Cornleigh. * Here's sovereign." laying the 
coin on the pictures. ' Oblige me — give 
some one you know." Then turning to 
Martial: ' Sorry you can't get on — no need 
to leave — see steward — arranofements can be 
made about the farm. Really didn't know 
myself — anything wrong." </p>

<p>^ I am much obliged," said Martial, ' but I 
must decline; I have determined to have 
nothing more to do with farming under 
present conditions." </p>

<p>"Mistake somewhere," said Cornleigh — • </p>



<p>"mistake — think it over — come and see me — 
will speak to steward — put it right." </p>

<p>This in spite of Martial's speech! It can 
hardly be supposed that the Squire was 
really so obtuse as not to have felt the point 
of the remarks Martial made at the meeting, 
and yet it was always difficult to tell whether 
he did or did not understand anything. Per- 
haps Letitia had begun to be alarmed at 
the loss of income as farmer after farmer 
quitted his tenancy, and had deterrnined that 
Martial should stay as an instance of a land- 
lord's clemency and conciliation. Doubtless 
she had been talking to the Squire about it. 
As was observed at the Maasbury meeting, 
now the rents are diminishing it is remark- 
able how the landlord fawns on the tenant. </p>

<p>"I cannot turn back," said Martial. ' Thank 
you very much, but I have made up my 
mind." </p>

<p>"Abner!" cried Felise ; ' why, there's 
Abner!" </p>

<p>He was walking across the garden; she
beckoned to him, and he came to the 
window. </p>

<p>"Why, that's the man — yesterday before 
me — police withdrew charge. Sad case. 
Give him sovereicfn — eh!" — Cornleij^h offered 
a picture and the sovereign on it to the 
labourer. </p>

<p>"Not from you, Squire," said Abner. ' I 
can't take nothing from you." </p>

<p>At that moment Robert Godwin burst in 
among them, followed by the village con- 
stable. Godwin's coat was torn and his 
face scratched, for he had forced his way 
through the hedges in his frenzied state; he 
was, too, soaking wet, having waded across 
the stream. When he rushed from the barn 
he ran and walked miles in a straight line, 
regardless of obstacles; presently he came 
back and got the policeman. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXVII</h2>

<p>HEY all rose at this sudden inter- 
ruption. </p>

<p>"Arrest him!" said Godwin, 
pointing to Martial. </p>

<p>"Arrest! What do you mean ?" said 
iUr. Gorinof. </p>

<p>"I — I — ha — ha — hum!" said Cornleigh. </p>

<p>"That's the man — take him! Where's 
your handcuffs?" shouted Godwin. </p>

<p>"On what charge?" said Mr. Goring. </p>

<p>"On what charge?" asked Cornleigh, 
naturally repeating, as he had done for so 
many years. </p>

<p>"I charge him with attempted murder 
— he fired at me! come, seize him !" </p>

<p>— Godwin thrust the policeman forward; 
the constable hesitated and looked towards 
the magistrate for instructions. </p>

<p>"I charge yon with the most brutal 
assault," said Martial. ' You tried to make 
the horse trample on Felise ' — he held Felise's 
arm as if it were necessary to protect her 
even there, </p>

<p>"I say arrest him!" shouted Godwin. 
' Quick — the handcuffs!" </p>

<p>Martial stepped forward with flushed face, 
but Mr. Goring intervened and held him back. </p>

<p>"Robert Godwin, leave this house!" he 
cried sternly. </p>

<p>"Leave the house!" repeated Cornleigh. </p>

<p>* He is a spendthrift rascal!" shouted God- 
win, pushing to get past Goring, and so at 
Martial. </p>

<p>Martial tried to get at the fellow. 
' Keep them apart!" cried Goring. </p>

<p>* Keep them apart!" cried Cornleigh, 
seizing Godwin's right arm, while the con- 
stable held his left. </p>

<p>"You ruined your cousins — you have 
brought the Miss Barnards to ruin! You 
have wasted your substance — you spendthrift 
rascal!" screamed the steward. </p>

<p>* Martial — Martial!" cried Felise ; ' don't, 
dear! don't strike him — he is insane 1" </p>

<p>Martial ceased to press towards the in- 
truder, but Godwin, in his ungovernable 
fury, dragged Cornleigh and the constable 
by main force past the window. From the 
window a stern hand seized the steward's 
collar — it was Abner. Godwin turned 
fiercely towards him. </p>

<p>"You be the man as killed my Mary," 
said Abner. </p>

<p>"Liar!" </p>

<p>"'Twas through you and he ' (nodding to- 
wards Cornleigh) ' as she jumped in the 
mill-pool. Thank you, miss, for the oak 
coffin as you give her. Measter Godwin, 
you knows what you said to Mary in the 
field once." </p>

<p>With a great effort Godwin forced himself
free from Cornleigh and the constable, up- 
setting some flowers in the window; he 
struck wildly at Abner as he passed — Abner 
drew back and let the blow expend itself — 
and rushed at Martial. Felise sprang in 
front of Martial and received a skirting blow 
on her arm; she cried out. Martial, Mr. 
Goring, Cornleigh, and the constable to- 
gether seized the madman. </p>

<p>Yet such was his immense strength that 
he dragged them to and fro — he swung them 
to and fro — the table cracked as their weight 
pressed on it, the partition-wall trembled as 
they came against it. Felise beckoned 
Abner — he ran in and helped. At last the 
paroxysm decreased; the four of them held 
Godwin somewhat still, but he continued to 
shout forth accusations at Martial, They 
pinioned him against the wall; he ground his 
teeth and foamed at the mouth, his face was 
black as night, his colourless eyes glared at 
Felise. </p>

<p>"You gave him the horse as a present," he
panted. ' Disgraceful! You gave him Ruy 
as a present, and he — he — he jilted Rosa 
Wood. He did — there — he was engaged to 
her — he jilted her!" </p>

<p>"He did not," said a voice, and Rosa 
Wood entered. She had knocked several 
times, but no one answered, and, hearing 
voices, she had ventured to enter. ' He did 
not. My father broke off the engagement. 
It was not Martial." </p>

<p>"I say arrest him!" shouted Godwin, again 
struggling. </p>

<p>'You are excited — wait till to-morrow/ 
said Mr. Goring, hoping to reason with 
him. </p>

<p>"Wait till to-morrow," repeated Cornleigh. </p>

<p>"What — you?" cried the steward, as if at 
last recognising his employer. </p>

<p>* You are excited," repeated Cornleigh. </p>

<p>"What!" cried Godwin, as if this was too 
much; that the man he had served so long 
should turn against and hold him. </p>

<p>"Wait till to-morrow — to-morrow," repeated 
Cornleigh. </p>

<p>"Why, he insulted you on the platform at 
the meeting," said Godwin. </p>

<p>"Try and be calm," said Mr. Goring. </p>

<p>"Try and be calm," repeated Cornleigh. </p>

<p>* Let me go," said Robert, suddenly ceasing 
to struggle. They left holding him; he 
walked out of the room and across the lawn, 
bareheaded in the sunshine. </p>

<p>"'Twas you as killed my Mary!" shouted 
Abner after him; he did not look back. </p>

<p>"He'll come to hisself presently," said the 
constable; ' I'll just see him home." He went 
after the steward. </p>

<p>As the agitation in the room subsided, 
Rosa felt the necessity of explaining her 
appearance. </p>

<p>"I had something to say to Martial and 
you," she said to Mr. Goring. * But I am 
glad Mr. Cornleigh is here." </p>

<p>"I am sorry you found things in such dis- 
order among us," said Mr. Goring, offering 
her a chair, but she continued standinof near 
Felise. She had evidently strung up her 
resolution, and wished to speak at once. </p>



<p>"Martial!" she said. </p>

<p>* Rosa!" his tone was somewhat con- 
strained. </p>

<p>"It is not true that he wasted the Miss 
Barnards" money," said Rosa, turning a Httle 
and speaking towards Mr. Goring. ' The 
truth is just the reverse — he straitened his 
own means for their sake. Martial! Martial !" 
(she spoke to him by name, but her face was 
towards Mr. Goring), ' I — I did not know till 
the meeting that you were in such trouble. 
I — I am very, very sorry — don't leave the 
old farm. I will lend you my money — it is 
four thousand — and you can settle" (she could 
not say ' marry') — ' I mean you can stay. Mr. 
Cornleigh, you will let him, won't you?" </p>

<p>'Of course," said Cornleigh. 'I — I have 
just mentioned the matter. Barnard, think 
it oven" </p>

<p>"No," said Martial, ' I cannot do it; I 
cannot go back; I will not submit again." </p>

<p>* Can be arranged," said Cornleigh. ' Mis- 
take put right, you know; all a mistake." </p>

<p>"Do take it!" said Rosa. ' It is my own — 
no one can stop me; but no one wishes to, for 
I have told papa. Do take it 1 it is four 
thousand — it is plenty." </p>

<p>* This is very noble of you," said Felise. 
' I hate you!" whispered Rosa aside. </p>

<p>"Oh!" Felise drew back. She understood 
instantly — a whisper, the sound of which the 
rest had heard, but had not caught the words, 
was enough for a woman. </p>

<p>* I cannot take; it, Rosa," said Martial. ' It 
is too much to thank you for — it is beyond 
thanks; but I cannot — I would rather work 
with my hands than return." </p>

<p>* But you must have it — I shall not be 
happy unless. There, I have said it — I will
write ' her voice faltered a little. 'Mr. </p>

<p>Goring, will you come with me?" Mr. Goring 
accompanied her to her carriage, she repeated 
it to him more fully, and begged him to use his 
influence with Martial, and not to let him leave 
the old house. He promised to do his best. </p>

<p>Meantime, Cornleigh was fidgeting with
his hat; though he was present. Martial 
could not quite suppress his feelings, and was 
perhaps more anxious than absolutely neces- 
sary in his inquiries if Felise's arm was hurt. 
She assured him it was not. Perhaps Corn- 
leigh did not appreciate these attentions 
to her. </p>

<p>"Must be Qfoino^," he said, risino^. * Have 
engagements. Miss Goring — feel sure I can 
rely on you to distribute these [the pictures] 
— worthy people. Good-morning [bowing] — 
most important, you know — raise aspirations 
— I — I — ha — hum ' and so exeunt. </p>

<p>Rosa had heard Martial's speech at the 
meeting in bitter misery; he was leaving his 
forefathers" home for lack of the money which 
she possessed so abundantly. If only he had 
loved her! Her love for him rose stronger 
than ever — in his ruin, and now that he loved 
another — he was dearer than ever. This 
noble woman — noble notwithstanding occa- 
sional pettiness — resolved that anyway he 
should be happy; and after a tearful inter- </p>

<p>view with her father, she drove over to the 
Manor House; thence, as Martial was not at 
home, she conquered her jealousy, and ac 
tually followed him to Beechknoll. </p>

<p>Anyway he should be happy — even with 
her. With this money he could marry and 
stay. The sight of Felise almost staggered 
her, but she was brave. She could not resist 
delivering that side-thrust, ' I hate you!" — 
still she adhered to her resolution. </p>

<p>By-and-by the constable came back, just to 
say (and get a glass of ale) that he had seen 
Mr. Godwin home; he was quite quiet-like 
now, and had gone up in his room to do 
some writing. ' He will be hisself again to- 
morrow." </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXVIII</h2>

<p>HE yellow moon rising above the 
hill cast long- shadows of the 
chestnut-trees, and illuminated a 
section of the barn through the space where 
the ereat doors had been. The haze of 
August seemed to have lingered in the 
atmosphere after the sun had set, and 
streaming through it the disk of the moon 
took a yellowish tint. Thus the harvest 
colour stayed on into the night; burnt by 
the sun's heat into the wheat and stubble, as 
hues are burnt in by the potter's furnace, this 
hazy yellow remained. There was a faint 
yellow in the stubble under the moonlight; 
the dried erass retained a faint hint of it; </p>

<p>the broad roof of the barn was yellowish- 
red. </p>

<p>Over the fields all things appeared dim 
and indistinct; the haze of day had settled 
down into the night. At hand the increasing 
brilliance of the moon — nearly full — lit up 
each leaf of the chestnut-trees. A star by the 
zenith, and one or two low down in the south, 
shone with the peculiar light of summer — they 
flickered slowly, and at each scintillation 
seemed nearly gone; their light was not 
equal to their size, and there were wide 
plains of the sky without a visible star. </p>

<p>The owl had gone past, and the bats had 
exhausted the excitement which seizes them at 
dusk. There was no sound of any living 
thino- • the wind had fallen, and the low 
murmur of the brook among its green flags 
did not reach so far. Under the hill the 
copse was touched with moonlight down the 
slope of the tree-tops; their recesses were 
in the deepest shadow. For while the beams 
of the moon illumine the side towards it — </p>





<p>that which immediately receives its rays — 
they are accompanied with Httle diffused 
light, and away from the actual impact of 
the rays there is always a darkness. Each 
leaf of the chestnut-trees on the side towards 
the east was brightly lighted, but behind each 
leaf there was shadow. By day the sun- 
beams would have gone, as it were, round 
and under the leaf, and there would have 
been light everywhere; by night there was 
a lit-up surface in front, and darkness be- 
hind. </p>

<p>Ruy lay as he had fallen, and was stiffening 
in the moonbeams before the chestnut-tree. 
Two night-crows were busy upon him; his 
eyes were already gone. </p>

<p>The crows moved uneasily at the sound of 
footsteps in the narrow lane, but did not rise 
till a man emerged from the shadow and 
came towards the tree. Silently the crows 
flew away into the dark by the copse; there 
were dots of white, too, now moving among 
the thistles by the verge of the wood — these
were the white tails of rabbits rushing away 
to their burrows. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin walked straight to the 
chestnut-tree, and, pausing on the spot where 
he had thrown Felise, drew from his pocket 
one of the old flintlock pistols he had so 
carefully cleaned. Without a moment's delay, 
and in the most matter-of-fact manner, he 
placed the muzzle of the pistol against his 
breast and touched the trigger. There was a 
flash as the powder ignited in the pan, but the 
charge did not explode. At the flash a bird 
fluttered out from the tree into the night. </p>

<p>Godwin did not hesitate in his fatal purpose 
because of this accidental reprieve from his 
own violence. He opened the pan and 
poured fresh gunpowder into it from some 
which he carried in a screw of newspaper in 
his waistcoat-pocket. With a pin he cleaned 
the touch-hole, and then patiently thrust the 
grains of powder as well as he could into the 
aperture, in order that the flame might next 
time communicate with the charge. </p>



<p>Some time since he had purchased two 
ounces of loose gunpowder at an ironmonger's 
in Maasbury — cheap powder, such as is sold 
for birdkeepers" guns; he would not go to the 
expense of Curtis and Harvey's diamond- 
grain. He did not quite know when he 
bought it whether it was to be used against 
himself or Martial, or against both. </p>

<p>When he thought he had primed the pistol 
he closed the pan, again put the. muzzle to 
his breast, and pulled the trigger. The 
bullet entered his heart and he fell dead; his 
face struck a bunch of yellow fungi growing 
in the grass, and lay still there. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIX</h2>

<p>k
K
E had not stayed to look at the 
stars, or to consider before his 
deed in the shadow of the chestnut- 
tree. His purpose was death, and he had 
walked to it straight without looking to the 
rieht or to the left. The dim outline of the 
hills was nothinir to him; he had seen in 
the hills nothing but mounds of chalk in life, 
why gaze at them on the eve of death? In 
the years of his life he had never lifted his 
eyes to the stars except to see if the sky was 
clear from cloud. </p>

<p>There was no meaning to him in the stars, 
or in the hills, or in the sea whose long low 
surge beat the beach beyond them. The
idea of immortality had never been orrasped, 
nor the idea of anything beyond the material 
and tangible. It is questionable whether he 
had ever grasped even the idea of a gas, as 
it is invisible — that which he could see and 
touch was all that Godwin knew. </p>

<p>There are many who repeat words of the 
like import freely, and have no conception 
of their meaning any more than veritable 
parrots. </p>

<p>Godwin was true to himself, and repeated 
no words the import of which he did not 
understand. </p>

<p>He had been insane when he attacked 
Felise; he had been insane when he struggled 
so violently in the room at Beechknoll; but 
he was not insane at the moment of his 
death. </p>

<p>The fit had passed from him, and he saw 
things clearly. As thunder dispels the heavi- 
ness of the atmosphere, so the sultry gloom 
of his brain had been dispelled by that 
vehement passage of hate and personal
violence. His brooding burst out in uncon- 
trollable action, and immediately afterwards 
his mind was relieved. </p>

<p>He knew then that the last nine years of 
his life had been in vain; that he mio-ht as 
well have been dead those nine years; that 
he might as well have been dead from the 
very moment he beheld her, and his unat- 
tainable love began. </p>

<p>How powerful, and yet how uncontrollable 
by ourselves, is the influence of our life upon 
the lives of others! To Robert Godwin 
the life — the mere existence of Felise had 
been a terrible fate. For aught you can tell, 
your existence may be a fate to another — 
another's to you. </p>

<p>From that instant he might as well have 
been dead, for his existence since had merely 
been an increasing madness of desire for the 
unattainable. </p>

<p>If anyone could have argued with him and 
pointed out that however great his trouble 
now, in time — slow time — the trouble would
wear away; in time — slow time — the memory 
itself would become dull and the vivid im- 
pressions fade; that he would come to live 
again, and to go about his duties as of old — 
then Robert Godwin would have laughed in 
derision. </p>

<p>He did not want his trouble to wear away, 
nor to return to his former self. So deep 
and so organic was the change produced by 
inalienable passion that his former condition 
before it commenced, even in his unhappi- 
ness, appeared to him worthless. He would 
not have returned to it if he could have 
done so. </p>

<p>The moment he came to himself and saw 
how hopeless his life had been these nine 
years past, he was dead. The act had not 
been committed, but he was dead of intent. 
He saw that, according to the strict logic of 
his nature, he should have slain himself nine 
years since. </p>

<p>The absence of imagination prevented him 
from amusing himself with possibilities of
another life in another land, of finding a face 
some day in another country which might in 
part be to him as this one had been. This 
absence of imagination prevented him from 
seeing anything that was not immediately 
before him; it slew him, but it rendered him 
faithful to his passion and to himself in his 
death. </p>

<p>His death atoned for nothing. The manner 
and the time of it were absolutely and purely 
selfish. He died for himself and for no 
other. </p>

<p>It rendered no reparation — even imaginary 
or sentimental — for poor Mary Shaw; it had 
no appearance even of sacrifice for the sake 
of those whom he had so harshly treated; 
there was no redeeming regret. There was 
no nobility, however mistaken, nor elevation 
in it; with no thought of any other but him- 
self he died, and it seemed to be no matter 
to the earth any more than the death of the 
horse beside which he lay. </p>

<p>By-and-by the night-crows returned to the </p>
carcase of the horse in the moonbeams before 
the chestnut-tree. </p>

<p>Godwin had left his papers in perfect order, 
notwithstanding the fact that he had done 
no pen-work for some time. They were all 
sorted and filed, and a memorandum had 
been drawn up stating where the money in 
hand was to be found, and directing the 
person who should be deputed for the 
purpose how to make up the accounts from 
the sorted papers. Not one sixpence of 
Cornleigh Cornleigh's money was missing, 
so faithful a servant had he had. The 
mechanical precision with which this had 
been done was characteristic of the man. </p>

<p>This was the writing which he had gone 
upstairs to do, as the constable said, quite 
quiet and like a lamb. It had occupied him 
— with intervals of thouerht — till dusk. He </p>
sat awhile after it was finished, then took 
one of the pistols from the attic where 
he had accidentally found them, and walked 
to the barn. As for the act, it scarcely took
three minutes till he was stretched lifeless 
with his face crushing the yellow fungi. </p>

<p>The silence about the chestnuts and the 
barn was unbroken till in the morning the 
rooks awoke in the wood on the hill and 
flew out over the fields. </p>

<p>Godwin's will had been drawn up years 
before; it left his property to his sister, with 
the strictest proviso that in case of her 
marriage the money should devolve upon 
her children. Beyond receiving the interest, 
her power over it was little. His estate, 
real and personal, was estimated at about 
twenty thousand pounds; an immense sum 
to be accumulated under such conditions, 
for sums must be measured by circumstances. 
That which is a trifle to the financial mon- 
archs of London is a vast amount in the 
country. What grinding self-denial, what 
harsh economy to himself and others that 
twenty thousand pounds represented! </p>

<p>When it became known in the morning 
that Godwin had destroyed himself, Mr. </p>



<p>Goring and Martial reproached themselves 
for not at least having endeavoured to obtain 
his arrest. The circumstances of the assault 
on Felise, if sworn to before a magistrate, 
would have secured his detention, and might 
thus have saved his life. </p>

<p>That they should have thought thus, again 
shows how little we understand even those 
who live close to us, and whose actions 
appear to give a clue to their minds. Had 
Robert Godwin been confined in a cell for 
a month, or six months, it would not have 
altered his purpose. At the first opportunity- 
he would have carried out his determination. 
Martial had been eager to bring him to 
answer for his conduct, but Felise had begged 
so hard that if possible the matter might not 
be made public, he had submitted. </p>

<p>Artistically speaking, Robert Godwin 
ought not to have committed suicide; he 
should have removed himself in some other 
way — he might have gone off to America, or 
disappeared. He rather spoils the narrative, </p>

<p>giving a cold deadly sensation to the finale; 
but he really could not help it — it was his 
nature. </p>

<p>Martial received a notification through 
Cornleio'h's solicitor, that if he would recon- 
sider his resolution matters could be arranged 
for him. Either the Squire was advised to 
make friends with the enemy, or it was 
feared that Martial's example might spread, 
and others leave. Too many had gone 
already. There seemed the greatest reluct- 
ance to part with a tenant, a state of senti- 
ment which to the older farmers contrasted 
singularly with the treatment they had 
received a very few years ago. </p>

<p>Rosa wrote him a letter repeating her 
noble offer; but despite these persuasions 
Martial remained unmoved, and took steps 
to leave the old place. Generous as Rosa's 
offer was,, he could not endure the idea 
of marrying with the aid of her money. 
Nothing could induce him to accept it; Rosa 
had not even this mournful pleasure. </p>



<p>What he should do when the stock was 
sold^ and he stepped for the last time over 
the threshold of the house his forefathers 
had dwelt in, Martial had but the vaguest 
idea. While he was considering one plan and 
another the thing was settled for him. </p>

<p>A report of his speech at the Maasbury 
meeting got into the hands of his former 
London friends, who were so delighted with 
his independent spirit and opinions — par- 
ticularly as these chanced to fit their own — 
that they sent for him to town. The former 
understanding was renewed, and the old 
quarrel forgotten. As the years had stolen 
on, the old folk too began to consider the 
end; they had no other natural heir but 
Martial, and with him personally had never 
disagreed. </p>

<p>An allowance — a very handsome one — was 
offered to him; but he refused to accept it 
unless employed in some way. The upshot 
was he was engaged in the design depart- 
ment of the great firm of marine engineers in
which his friends were the principals. Here 
his ingenious turn of mind soon found scope. 
His time was really his own, and he was 
naturally often at Beechknoll. His friends 
have given him to understand that at the 
next election, if it can be arranged, he will 
be put forward to contest Maasbury in- 
dependently. </p>

<p>Before the golden tints had faded from the 
trees, Felise and Martial were married. </p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXX</h2>

<p>UT of the dusk which Hngered on 
the earth, while in the sky the 
^ hght was approaching, a lark 
sprang up and, soaring above the darkness, 
sang by Beechknoll. It was a very early 
morning in May, and Felise, in her dressing- 
gown, had stolen quietly to the window, and 
sat there watching the dawn. Martial was 
sleeping. They had come down for awhile 
to be with Mr, Goring, who was lonely even 
among his trees. The man slept; the woman, 
wakeful in her happiness, stole to the window 
where she had so often sat of old time. </p>

<p>Upon the ground there lay a stratum of 
darkness which seemed scarcely to rise so
high as the eaves — a darkness visible Hke a 
mist, thickening in the corners and by the 
trees. Through this the lark soaring sang in 
the clear air above. </p>

<p>Afar alons" the rido^e of the hills there was a 
white light — the dawn — which imperceptibly 
rushed rapidly through the atmosphere, not only 
rising to the zenith but spreading horizontally 
over the fields. The trees that were towards 
the east bee^^n to have beneath them the dim 
outline of their own shadow on the grass. 
Already these dim outlines of masses of 
foliao-e shadowed on the sward were visible 
throueh the sinkinfj stratum of darkness. </p>

<p>Another lark sang at a distance, and then a 
third; their notes fell with the last rays of the 
stars. So long as the night-blue tint of the 
sky continued the stars shone; as the dawn- 
beams shot upwards and increased in bright- 
ness this night-blue tint began to change, and 
with it the stars retired into the depths of 
space. There was a gleam like dew on the 
pearls lying by the mirror; Martial had re- </p>





<p>deemed them, and she had worn them the 
previous evening. </p>

<p>In a moment, as it seemed to Felise, the 
darkness on the ground vanished, and all 
things appeared distinct and clear. Really 
the change had been gradually advancing — 
in appearance it seemed effected almost 
suddenly. </p>

<p>Immediately a thrush commenced to call 
in the thickets that had been planted so 
abundantly about the house, a second an- 
swered; a blackbird called ; then, as if at a 
signal, the whole choir began to sing. There 
was a score of them, thrushes and black- 
birds; all started at once ; their chorus burst 
upon the dawn. </p>

<p>The stars were gone, and the deep azure of 
the morning filled the sky. By the ridge of 
the hill the white light shone brightly; above 
it a purple mingled luminously with the blue; 
towards the zenith the loveliness of the colour 
is not to be written. </p>

<p>The man slept, but the woman, wakeful in
happiness, sat by the window. The dawn 
shone on her face, and upon the beautiful 
golden hair drooping to her knees. Her 
hands were folded, the same attitude in 
great happiness as in inconsolable sorrow; 
the dawn glistened upon the tears in her 
eyes. </p>

<p>Her feeling was perhaps the deeper because 
he slept, because she was alone and yet with 
him. She did not strive, womanlike, to mould 
her feelings to his mood — she gave way to 
her own. </p>

<p>Her joy was so great because her life was 
fulfilled. So soon in the spring-time of youth 
her life was fulfilled; there was nothing more 
beyond to strive or hope for. It was the joy 
of intense rest in possession. </p>

<p>The man knows no such feeling. To him 
the joy of existence is in pursuit and con- 
quest; while he is succeeding, while pursuing 
and gaining in pursuit he rejoices — the mere 
possession is little or nothing. The more 
active his days — the greater his scheme of
the future — so much the more he loves the 
woman he has chosen. </p>

<p>But the woman has no future. Her all is 
here. In possession is everything; in that her 
life is fulfilled. </p>

<p>As the miser gloats over his gold, not for 
what it will purchase, but for its own sake, so 
the woman gloats over possession, not for any 
future success, but because he is hers now. </p>

<p>Of what the day might bring forth she 
thought nothing, whether it should be profit 
or failure, so long only as he was there. Of 
what the years might have in store, wealth 
or poverty, concerned her nothing so long as 
he was with her. </p>

<p>A pure rest had come to her life. </p>

<p>Except to love and to love fulfilled, and 
then only to woman, is such rest ever given. 
For the heart, and the hand, and the mind of 
a man are for ever driving onwards, and no 
profundity of rest ever comes to his inmost 
consciousness. At dawn he looks forward to 
the noonday. </p>

<p>So that true and restful happiness Is for 
woman only, though it is given to her by 
man. </p>

<p>A golden breath came up among the 
bright whiteness of the light over the ridge 
of the hill; there were scarlet streaks, the 
lips of the morning. In the glorious beauty 
of the sunrise her heart brimmed to the full 
of love. </p>

<p>"Felise." </p>

<p>Her answer was a kiss amid the dew of 
lovino^ tears. </p>

<p>THE END. </p>

<p>BILLING AND SONS, I'KINTERS, GUILDPOKD. </p>

<p>C, C. <5>"Co. </p>

<p>UMVFJ
L
''iiy () </p>

<p>^. </p>

<p>\^ </p>

<p>UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY
Los Angeles 
This book is DUE on the last date stamped below. </p>

<p>RECD LD-URl
L.O
ygt HOV 12 1971
NOV 519:3
r)0m-7.'69(N296s4^ — C-120
^^OFCAIlF0/?iv ."V
UC SOUTHERN Rfi, I';■.■■■: . hn^-iu ^ :■• uTY
AA 000 373 897 8
LALirU/r:, </p>

<p>iv!iaii# </p>

<p>■\tp: </p>

<p>t
PLEA-'E DO NOT REMOVE 
JHIS BOOK CARD J
University Research LibrarN
l-i\^^ </p>

<p>i! ■';.'■! </p>

<p>
