
<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">I</h2> 


<p>The sunbeams streamed over Ashpen 
Hill into a broad lane, a little after 
four in the morning. Felise was 
walking slowly towards the hill, which was 
yet at some distance, staying every moment 
to glance aside into the green and dew-laden 
hedges. On her right the hedge came to 
the sward; on the left a bank rose, and the 
hedge went along the summit.</p>

<p>The fragrance of the dew, invisibly 
evaporating, filled the air she breathed. 
From sweet-green hawthorn leaves, from 
heavy grasses drooping, the glittering drops 
dissolving brought with them the odour of 
leaf and flower. The larks, long since up, 
had sung the atmosphere clear of the faint 
white mist left by the night.</p>

<p>She found blue veronica in a bunch of 
grass under a dead thorn-branch, blown by 
the winds months ago out from the hedge. 
She lifted up the branch to fling it aside, and 
give the flowers more room and freedom; 
but she replaced it, reflecting that the thorns 
would perhaps prevent passing sheep from 
treading on them. </p>

<p>Upon the bank there was a cowslip; one 
stalk bore deep orange flowers, the others 
bunches yet unopened, and clothed in delicate 
green. Felise took the flower, which no bee 
had yet sipped, put it to her lips, and then 
placed it in her dress. </p>

<p>She stepped lightly round the smooth 
brown boulder-stones with which the lane 
was dotted in places — rude disjointed efforts 
at paving — beside which grew bunches of 
rushes, safe there from the cart-wheels. Not 
even cart-wheels could stand the jolt over 
these iron rocks. She walked sometimes on 
the elevated sides of the ruts — the earth had 
been forced up by the crushing weight of 
waggon-loads; they were grass-grown, and 
the grass hung over the groove, along which 
weasels often hunted. </p>

<p>Sometimes she trod the sward by the 
bank, where it was short, and full of three- 
leaved clover whose white bloom was not 
yet out; then, crossing to the opposite side, 
she sauntered by the hedge there, letting the 
hawthorn brush her skirt, and the soft green 
hooks of the young bramble-shoots strive in 
vain to hold her. </p>

<p>An ash-branch stood out to bar her path. 
She stopped and touched it, and counted the 
leaves on the sprays; they were all un- 
even. </p>

<p>In the grass ahead the pinkish ears of a 
young rabbit stood up; he was nibbling 
peacefully, heedless of her approach. Not 
till she was close did he raise himself to look 
at her, first sitting on his haunches, then as 
if about to beg, then away into the burrow. </p>

<p>Her white hand wandered presently among 
more blue veronica flowering on the slope 
of the bank. She did not gather — she 
touched only, and went on. She touched, 
too, the tips of some brake, freshly-green, 
and rising rapidly now day by day. A rush 
of wings — a wood-pigeon came over; he was 
startled, and, swerving, went higher into the 
air. </p>

<p>There was honeysuckle on the hedge 
above the bank, too far to reach. She took a 
hawthorn leaf, felt it, and dropped it; then 
pulled a bennet, or grass-stalk, and dropped 
that; then pulled a rush, and left it. A 
lover might have tracked her easily by the 
foot-marks on the dewy grass — by the rush 
thrown down, and by the white handkerchief 
which she had carried in her hand and un- 
consciously dropped. A robin came to look 
at the handkerchief before she had gone 
many minutes; he thought perhaps there 
might be a crumb, and he is, too, very in- 
quisitive. </p>

<p>Felise sat down on a great trunk of oak 
lying in the lane by a gateway, and sighed 
with very depth of enjoyment. There was 
a yellow-hammer perched on the gate, and he 
had been singing. When Felise approached, 
he ceased; but^seeing that she was quiet and 
intended him no harm, he began again. His 
four or five rising notes, and the long-drawn 
idle-sounding note with which they conclude, 
suited so well with the sunshine, they 
soothed her still further. She sighed again, 
and let herself sit loosely on the oak-trunk, 
like the yellow-hammer. He had his back 
humped, and all his body rested comfortably. 
So did she; she permitted her back to bow, 
her shoulders to stoop, her limbs to relax, 
and idle nature to have her own way. After 
a while she sighed again. </p>

<p>She was bathing in the beauty of the 
morning — floating upheld on the dewy 
petals. A swimmer lies on the warm 
summer water, the softest of couches, ex- 
tended at full length, the body so gently held 
that it undulates slightly with the faint swell. 
So soft is the couch it softens the frame, 
which becomes supple, flexible, like the water 
itself. </p>

<p>Felise was lying on the flowers and grass, 
extended under the sun, steeped in their 
sweetness. She visibly sat on the oak-trunk 
— invisibly her nature was reclining, as the 
swimmer on the sun-warmed sea. Her 
frame drooped as the soul, which bears it up, 
flowed outwards, feeling to grass, and flower, 
and leaf, as the swimmer spreads the arms 
abroad, and the fingers feel the water. She 
sighed with deep content, dissolving in the 
luxurious bath of beauty. </p>

<p>Her strong heart beating, the pulses 
throbbing, her bosom rising and regularly 
sinking with the rich waves of life; her 
supple limbs and roundness filled with the 
plenty of ripe youth; her white, soft, roseate 
skin, the surface where the sun touched her 
hand glistening with the dew of the pore; 
the bloom upon her — that glow of the morn 
of life — the hair more lovely than the 
sunlight; the grace unwritten of perfect 
form — these produced within her a sense of 
existence — a consciousness of being, to 
which she was abandoned; and her lips 
parted to sigh. The sigh was the expression 
of feeling herself to be. </p>

<p>To be ! To live ! To have an intense 
enjoyment in every inspiration of breath; in 
every beat of the pulse; in every movement 
of the limbs; in every sense ! </p>

<p>The rugged oak-trunk was pleasant to her. 
She placed her hand on the brown, stained 
wood — stained with its own sap, for the bark 
had been removed. She touched it; and so 
full of life was her touch, that it found a 
pleasure in that rude wood. The brown 
boulder-stone in the lane, ancient, smoothed, 
and ground in times which have vanished 
like a cloud, its surface the colour of old 
polished oak, reflecting the sun with a dull 
gleam — the very boulder-stone was pleasant 
to her, so full of life was her sense of sight. </p>

<p>There came a skylark, dropping over the 
hedge, and alighted on a dusty level spot in 
the lane. His shadow shot a foot long on 
the dust, thrown by the level beams of the 
sun. The dust, in shadow and sunshine — 
the despised dust — now that the lark drew 
her glance to it, was pleasant to see. </p>

<p>All things are joyously beautiful to those 
who feel themselves to be; but it is only 
given to the chosen of nature to know this 
exceeding delight. </p>

<p>In herself rapt, the whole face of earth 
and sky ministered to her, each and all 
that made up the visible world was flung 
at her feet. They did homage — Felise, 
queen of herself, was queen of all. </p>

<p>It was love without a lover — love absorbed 
in itself. Her whole existence was quiver- 
ing with love; this intensity of life was love. 
She was gathering from sunlight, azure sky 
and grassy fields, from dewy hills and all the 
morning, an immense strength to love. Her 
parted lips sighed — there was such store and 
warmth of love within them. Without a 
thought she thought deeply, pondering, 
weighed down on herself with weight of 
feehng. Her own intense existence absorbed 
her. </p>

<p>Till looking that way, she saw that there 
was now a broad space between the lower 
rim of the sun and the hill she meant to 
climb; then she got up, and went on. She 
had started in time to see the sun rise, from 
its summit, but had idled and dallied with 
flowers and green boughs on the way, and 
lost the sunrise. 
</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2> 

The lane became more rugged; then 
there was a sudden dip, and in the 
hollow of the dip a streamlet ran 
across. A blackbird had been splashing in 
the water; and, as she came over the slope, 
rose up loudly calling. He perched on the 
hedge, looked towards her impudently from 
his dark eyes, half a mind to defy her, so 
bold was he in his beauty of blackest black 
and tawny bill. But as she stepped nearer 
he went off, J^ain loudly calling and startling 
every bird in the field. </p>

<p>The streamlet was so shallow the small 
flams were only half submerged, and the 
■wiSeT was but a few inches wide. The sand 
!!ERR

which the blackbird had disturbed floated 
quickly away, leaving it perfectly pure. 
Felise stooped, dipped her fingers, and 
watched the drops fall sparkling from them. 
She felt the water; she liked to touch aL 
things — the sunlight shone the brighter on 
her hand because it was wet. </p>

<p>Beyond the streamlet the lane rose rapidly, 
rugged and narrow; the hedges ceased, and 
only a hawthorn-bush here and there ap- 
peared on the banks. Presently it became a 
deep white groove, worn in chalk. </p>

<p>Felise stepped quickly now, and in a few 
minutes reached the foot of the hill, where 
the lane left the straight line, and went up 
the Downs aslant, so that waggons might be 
drawn up, which they could not have been 
had the track been straight. </p>

<p>The moment Felise's foot touched the 
sward, she began to run up the hill, making 
direct for the ridge, like a hare, or a bee bent 
for the thyme above. Her arched insteps, 
like springs, threw her forwards; her sinews. 
strung and strong, lifted her easily.. Her 
weight did not press the turf — it was for the 
time suspended between her swift bounds. 
, Rejoicing, her deep chest opened, the pliant 
ribs, like opening fingers, made room for 
f cubic feet of purest atmosphere. The air </p>
inhaled lifted her; she was lighter and more 
swift. </p>
!!ERR

<p>Forced into the blood, the strong hill air 
intoxicated her. She forgot all; she saw 
nothing — neither the sun, the sky, nor the 
slope itself; her entire being was occupied 
in putting forth her strength. Up — from 
thyme-bunch to thyme-bunch; past grey flat 
flints; past rusty ironstone fragments; past 
the parallel paths, a few inches wide, which 
streaked the hill — up, straight for the 
summit ! </p>

<p>A lark, startled, fled, but immediately 
began to soar and sing. The landscape 
widened beneath; there were woods and 
bright fields. She did not see the fields, or 
woods, or hear the lark; nor notice the flints 
which, like lesser mile-stones, marked her 
run. Her limbs grew stronger, her bounds 
more powerful, as her breath was drawn in 
long, deep inspirations. The labour in- 
creased her strength; her appetite for the 
work grew as she went. She ran and drank 
the wind to have more of herself — to have 
the fulness of her own existence. The 
great heart within her throbbed and bore 
her, replying to her spirit. </p>

<p>More flints, more thyme — a stone-chat 
flitted away — longer grass, more slippery, 
the slope steeper, still — up ! </p>

<p>Yet the strong limbs could not bound 
quite so far; the feet fell as swiftly, but the 
space covered was not so wide. There was 
effort now. </p>

<p>Brave as may be the heart of woman, yet 
the high hills must try it. So great was the 
rush of the aerated blood, it seemed to 
threaten to suffocate her. The supple knees 
could not straighten themselves; they re- 
mained slightly bent. The pliant ribs, opened 
to their widest, seemed forced outwards by 
an expansive power which must break them 
to get free. Her head was thrown back : 
she did not look now at the ridge; she 
looked up at the sky. Surely the summit 
must be near? </p>

<p>She would have dropped rather than give 
up; she would have dropped like a hunted 
animal before she would have yielded. </p>

<p>The time when she knew she must fall 
was numbered now but by seconds. The 
strong air which at first gave such a sense 
of vigour was now too strong; it began 
to take away her breath. She did not 
feel her limbs; they moved mechanically, 
though still quickly. She saw nothing but 
the sky. Five seconds more, and down she 
must go : not even that great heart could 
bear more. </p>

<p>But she was nearer than she knew. Sud- 
denly the slope became less steep, where the 
summit seemed planed away; her feet went 
along instead of having to be lifted. She 
looked and saw the thorn-bush on the ridge 
before her. She stopped by the bush; she 
had done it — the hill was conquered. </p>

<p>She could not stand quite still; she 
walked slowly forwards — the sudden relief 
to her panting chest was unbearable if she 
stood. Pant, pant; throb, throb ! But her 
heart sang in its throbs; her eyes gleamed 
with delight. She walked slowly in a circle, 
and came back to the old thorn-bush. She 
could stand now. She looked towards the 
horizon, blue where it met the descending 
dome of the sky* </p>

<p>First her gaze went straight out to the 
farthest, where earth appeared immaterial like 
the sky; after that it travelled back to her, 
over woods, the gleam of water, more 
woods, which were less dense, and had 
glades of green meadows between them; 
then rested for awhile on a red roof among 
sycamores and elms — home — then came 
nearer. And now she looked downy having 
previously looked out — down on the lane, 



<p>and on the cornfields; thatched roofs yonder 
on the left, and early smoke rising; an idle 
windmill; a church-tower, round which black 
specks of daws were wheeling; and corn- 
fields, brightly green. Her heart sang 
within her. She triumphed; she was full of 
her own life. </p>

<p>In all that vast plain there was not a 
woman that could have done it, and not two 
men. </p>

<p>There was nothing large, gigantic, or 
Amazonian about her; it was the perfection 
of her physical nature, not size or training. 
Her natural body had been further perfected 
by a purely natural life. The wind, the sun, 
the fields, the hills — freedom, and the spirit 
which dwells among these, had made her a 
natural woman; such a woman as Earth 
meant to live upon her surface, and as Earth 
intended in the first origin of things : 
beauty and strength — strength and beauty. </p>

<p>What a latent power of love was there 
in that richness of blood, that depth of chest, 

</p>



<p>that greatness of heart ! Pure love, pure as 
the spring- water that comes from the hills, 
was there ready to be poured forth — always 
full, always pouring, always the same and 
always pure. </p>

<p>Felise walked along the summit of the 
hill till she reached the place on the other 
side where it sloped downwards. There the 
dew had fully dried — it was the eastern 
slope, and so received the full rays of the 
sun from his earliest rising. In summer he 
rises with his full rays, and steps at once in 
all his fiery strength up over the eastern 
horizon. The turf was perfectly dry; she sat 
down, facing eastwards. </p>

<p>Now, for the first time, she heard the larks 
singing; she had been too full of her own 
thoughts and efforts to listen before. 


</p>

<p>VOL. I. 2 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">III</h2> 



(jHE had seen him so little, and yet 
her passion had taken such hold 
of her. She knew that she had 
not come forth to see the sunrise and to 
bathe in the light of morning. It was to 
drink deep of the emotion which filled her; 
she must go out into the broad morning 
where alone was room enough for the heart 
to breathe. Filled and overflowing with 
love, yet such is the insatiable nature of 
passion that she, who thought of nothing 
else, went to try and think still more. </p>

<p>Ail this had come at once, in a few weeks 
— all this concentration and burst of desiring; 

</p>



<p>and with so little cause, for she had scarcely 
seen him. This proves that her heart had 
been full of love to its utmost capacity long 
before they had met; that incident was 
merely the outlet. </p>

<p>As she had roamed about the hills, and 
wandered in the woods, or by the shore, 
musing in deep enjoyment of the sunlight 
and the wind, love was coursing through 
each vein, filling every throb of her heart. 
It was this which gave such beauty to the 
flower, such colour to the sky, such pleasant 
coolness to the stream. She awoke to it 
in the morning as the swallows came to the 
eave by the window; they had been coursing 
long before through the air while she lay 
sleeping. </p>

<p>She threw open her window and breathed 
it — the sweet wind from the meadows brought 
it. All day the sunlight poured it forth 
upon the green grass and rustling leaves; 
she moved in it as she moved in the sun- 
beams. By night it was with her. An
inexpressible fulness of passion grew in her 
breast. </p>

<p>But could this be ? Could anyone love 
without an object ? Is it possible for the 
heart to become full and yet without an 
image ? Not perhaps with a small nature, 
a narrow mind, a stunted being. With all 
great hearts and true women it is always the 
case; they love first in themselves, they love 
without knowing why, or whom — it is their 
very life. If such a great and noble woman 
were enclosed in a prison from youth, and 
permitted no sight of man, still to the end 
of existence she would love. The divine 
flame lighted in her with life would burn on 
to the last moment. </p>

<p>Felise's heart was lost before she saw him. 
She lost it amid the flowers of the meadow, 
the wind on the hill, by the rushing stream. 
She lost it in her study among her books, 
her poetry of old Greece — songs of the 
' Violet Land ' — her ' Odyssey ' and dramas of 
Sophocles and iEschylus; among the stars 

</p>



<p>that swept by over the hill; hy the surge 
that ran up and kissed her feet. The pointed 
grass stole it from her; the fresh leaves of 
spring demanded it; all things beautiful 
took it from her. Her heart was lost long 
since. </p>

<p>The streamlet in the woods is full before 
the dove alights to drink at it; the flower in 
the grass has expanded before the butterfly- 
comes. A great passion does not leap into 
existence as violets sprang up beneath the 
white feet of Aphrodite. It has grown first. 
The grapes have ripened in the sun before 
they are plucked for wine. </p>

<p>Her vigour of life was very great; yet it 
was not that that sent her to the fields and 
woods, to the hilltop and the shore; nor 
the abounding physical vigour which forced 
her broad chest through the clear green sea; 
nor the strong muscle hidden in the rounded 
arm which drove her boat over the waves. 
The soul that inspired the effort was the love 
that was growing within her.</p>

 
<p>There were women in the country far 
larger of limb than she was; more bulky of 
arm and brawny of chest — strong as reapers. 
They did not swim, though the sea was open 
to them; they did not row and spend whole 
days upon the water; they did not climb 
the hills and wander in the solitary valleys. 
They had the strength; they could have 
lifted a heavier weight than she could have 
done; they could have outworked her in 
manual tasks, yet they exhibited no energy. 
Such as were poor remained about their 
cottages; such as were better off stayed in 
their farmhouses. The little circumstances 
of daily life were enough for them, and they 
were satisfied with the petty gossip of the 
village and the market-town. </p>

<p>If there were any gala in the town they 
were eager enough then to don their finest 
and trudge, or ride as the case might be, 
thither, earliest to arrive and last to leave. 
Enterprise enough for that was in them. So 
totally were they without imagination that a 
flower-show, or a fete, or a fair roused them 
to the highest pitch of excitement. The 
band and the gay dresses, the noise and the 
crowd supplied what was naturally lacking in 
their minds. They had no colour within, 
and so sought it without. </p>

<p>They rushed to the fete or gala; for the 
rest, day after day, week after week, month 
after month, they were satisfied indoors with 
the petty things of the hour. The violets, 
the honeysuckle, the roses later on, were 
nothing to them; the sea nothing. It was 
within walking-distance, as near as the gala- 
field, but they never went to it. </p>

<p>Therefore it was not Felise's physical 
vigour which made her seek the sun and the 
hills, not that which made her row and swim. 
Something else beside the abundant young 
life of. the blood was there to give the 
impulse. The soul of her blood was the 
passion within. </p>

<p>This gave the vigour to her white limbs 
as she swam, supplying the force with 
which they thrust back the clear green sea; 
this pulled at the oar; this lifted her as she 
ran up the steep hillside. Her own heart 
coloured the flower she gathered, and gave a 
grace to the beech-trees beneath which she 
wandered. From herself came the brilliance 
of the sunlight, and the meaning in the 
books she read. </p>

<p>They did not go out into the fields, or 
wander in the woods, because they saw 
nothing there but fields and woods, nothing 
but grass and trees. </p>

<p>Felise carried with her a fresh colour for 
each flower, a thought for every tree, a 
feeling into the depths of the shadowy 
woods. The beauty of the grasses and the 
green wheat was in her; she brought the 
beauty to them. Slowly undulating the 
wave approached her boat : the grey wave 
poised itself a moment beside the boat, and 
immediately bowed itself beneath her. She 
saw down to the pale furrowed sand, and the 
sea-weed in the shallow. In the clear water 
there was nothing of itself, but her heart put. 
a feeling there — ^just as she let her hand 
droop over into the sea. </p>

<p>With her soul grew her love; this purest 
of love, and yet strongest of passions. Her 
young limbs became stronger, her young 
chest broader, her shoulders and her back 
finer : a firmer pulse throbbed in her veins. 
So the soul enlarged as day after day of 
musing passed, and those long half-conscious 
reveries which are to the soul as sleep to the 
frame. She rejoiced in the morning and the 
sunrise, and felt the glowing beauty of the 
day; she saw the night and its stars, and 
knew the grandeur of the earth's measured 
onward roll eastwards, the hexameter of 
heaven. </p>

<p>She saw these things because at her birth 
love was born with her; the flame was lit 
with her life, and must burn till the end. </p>

<p>There are but few men, one only they say 
in many, many years, in whom the fire of 
genius is clear from youth. These are born—
such cannot be educated up from common 
material. There are but few women (though 
more in proportion than such men) in whom 
the divine flame of unutterable love exists 
from the first moment of consciousness, still 
growing with their growth. The mark of 
love was stamped on Felise's forehead. </p>

<p>Hence the sweetness of the morning to 
her; hence the joy of swimming in the clear 
green sea; the pleasure of rowing; of 
running on the hills; the beauty of the 
flowers. She brought to all a song — the 
song of her heart. So that it is true to say 
that she loved before she had seen the object 
of her love. Who should have her would 
have a twofold Felise — the outward beauty 
of the woman, the inward beauty of her 
soul. 
</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2> 

<p>Felise listened to the larks as they 
rose and sang — now one, now two, 
now six or seven at once. They 
did not soar to a great height; but, starting 
from a field of clover beneath, came up a 
little above the level where she sat, and sang 
like a chorus before her. She listened, and 
in her heart silently asked the same as they 
did aloud. Over their nests and their beloved 
ones they uttered their verses, in melody 
requiring of the sun and of the earth 
happiness for these, and for themselves per- 
mission to live. </p>

<p>Chanting their welcome to the sun, they 
breathlessly poured out a prayer demanding, 
in a thousand trills, that the joy of day and 
life might descend upon their homes. They 
sank to the clover, but speedily came up 
again, restless in their gladness, eager to 
acknowledge the benefit of day, eager to 
secure fulfilment of their hopes for their 
young, fearful lest they had not expressed 
themselves sufficiently, lest they had seemed 
ungrateful. </p>

<p>Felise asked in her heart the same as they 
did. Her overflowing heart asked happi- 
ness for the image that now filled it; for 
herself only that she might contribute to his 
happiness — that she might sacrifice herself — 
that she might lay down her life for 
him. </p>

<p>Of old, old time the classic women in the 
'Violet Land' of Greece went out to the sun- 
rise, and, singing to Apollo, the sun, prayed 
that their hearts might be satisfied, and their 
homes secured; by the fountain they asked 
of the water that the highest aspirations of 
their souls might be fulfilled; of the earth 

</p>



<p>they asked an abundance for those whom 
they loved. </p>

<p>No more the hymn is heard to the sun; 
no more the stream murmurs in an under- 
tone to the chorus of human hopes; no more 
the earth sees its wheat and its flowers taken 
from it to be presented to it again upon the 
altar in token of gratitude and prayer. </p>

<p>But still the larks, as then, and still the 
thrushes, the fleeting swallows, and the 
doves, address themselves to sun, and earth, 
and stream, and heaven. Their songs vary 
not, their creed does not change, their prayer 
goes forth to the same old gods. </p>

<p>Have our hopes and hearts changed in the 
centuries ? No; not one whit. </p>

<p>Felise asked the same as many a deep- 
breasted maiden in the days of Apollo and 
Aphrodite. Only her heart was pure, 
and uncontaminated even by any sensuous 
myth. </p>

<p>The larks sang out of the fulness of their 
hearts; they were not conscious that they 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>prayed, though in truth they did. Her 
heart spoke without volition, she was not 
aware she was praying. With all her being 
she demanded that joy might reach her 
beloved, that she might lie like the dust at 
his feet, in her sacrifice her triumph. </p>

<p>Came the sun in all his glory, and the 
wind from the sea; the deep azure sky was 
over her, the woods and the green wheat 
below. The hills were all her own; there 
was no one else to claim them in the morn- 
ing. She alone looked at the sky, and it 
was hers. Could she have done so, she 
would have given the wide earth and all its 
fruits to her beloved. </p>

<p>The richness of the corn in the plain, and 
of the luxuriant grasses in the meadow; the 
ancient oaks and the thousand elms; the 
hedges hung with honeysuckle, and where 
the roses were coming; the sweet waters, 
and the flowers that stood by them; all that 
grew afar to the horizon. Nor was that 
enough. The dim blue sea yonder, the 

</p>



<p>bright blue heavens, the glowing light; she 
would have given him all for his delight, as 
a goddess of old time might have taken a 
mortal in her chariot through the ether. </p>

<p>She was leaning on her arm, reclining on 
the sward, and the throbs of her heart 
vibrated through her arm to the earth. 
Quickened by the violence of her run up 
the hill it beat rapidly, causing her arm to 
tremble slightly. It was meet that so noble 
a heart should rest upon the boundless 
earth. There the rudeness of its beat 
diminished, and the vehemence of the vibra- 
tion subsided. </p>

<p>But not so the vehemence of the passion 
within. The glowing light and pleasant air, 
the broad green wheat under, all the blue 
above, the beauty of the world but fed the 
flame. So much the more she entered into 
the loveliness of the day, so much the more 
grew the desire which was her life. </p>

<p>She had gone out at the dawn that she 
n^ight grasp it from the sun at his rising, 

</p>

 </p>

<p>that she might steal from the dewy grass and 
the fresh leaves, and seize her love from the 
purple sky. The sun had risen and the 
morning was opening into day, but she was 
insatiate, still she wished for more. She 
had fed herself with the light, and dew, and 
loveliness of the sunny morn, yet her hunger 
grew with all she fed on. There was no rest 
for her in the sunlight, on all the wide 
earth. </p>

<p>If in the time to come she should have 
her dream, would even then her heart be 
satisfied ? Could she ever love enough to 
relieve her love ? </p>

<p>The one over-mastering desire was to 
give — nothing for herself, all for him. To 
give. him all things; to ask nothing in re- 
turn. Her desire was immeasurable — she 
looked greedily on the earth spread out at 
the base of the hill — that she might pour 
plenty at his feet, that she might give him 
the loveliness of all. </p>

<p>The larks were still singing, but she was 

</p>



<p>not listening now. Their notes were far 
away, as if they sang higher than the clouds. 
Tears gathered in her eyes, and dimmed the 
view of the beauteous morn. Her breast 
heaved once, and her breath paused in her 
throat, checked by a sigh. A deep prayer 
can but end in tears — a prayer like this 
which has no words, but gives a life instead 
of them. It was not sorrow, it was the un- 
utterable depth of her joy in the love that 
held her. </p>

<p>He knew it not — what of that ? He 
might never know — what of that ? She had 
given her life to him, and it was a joy to her 
that she had done so. But with that joy 
there mingled the undertone of knowledge and 
of thought, that she should never, never, not 
even if his arms were about her, be able to 
fully pour forth her heart, making him under- 
stand her. How could he understand her ? 
How could she ever tell him ? And all that 
she could ever do for him under the happiest 
circumstances could not amount to one </p>

<p>VOL. I. X 

</p>

 </p>

<p>hundredth part of what she wished to do. 
She felt in that moment of tears that the 
fruition of human wishes can never equal the 
desire. The limit is reached long, long 
before. All falls so short. </p>

<p>Her breath came freely again, and she 
saw the distant sea clearly — the mist in her 
eyes was gone. Once more the larks sang 
sweetly, and she listened. If we cannot 
reach to ideal things, at least we can do much, 
nearer to earth. The larks cannot rise to the 
heavens, but they sing high above their nests, 
and their voices are sweet to all below them. </p>

<p>Felise raised herself higher on her arm, 
and looked boldly at the blue sea-line. Her 
heart rose again; the strong courage in her 
inspired it. Bright and beautiful as the 
morning she rose to her feet, dauntless and 
resolute. Her will was strengthened by 
love, made ten times stronger. Bold as the 
sun, unabashed as the day, she would have 
her will; she claimed love as her right. 
Come what might, she would be his. 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">V</h2> </p>

<p>I H E sun had now grown fierce, and 
Felise, rising from the ground, 
walked along the hill, whose 
summit gradually declined. These hills of 
chalk are generally very steep in front, and 
laborious to ascend if attempted there; but 
at the rear they are much easier, and present 
no difficulty. In this they resemble human 
life, for the aspiring, whether in letters, 
politics, or commerce, find the utmost trouble 
in climbing up the precipitous frowning brow 
which defends the prize; but once on the top, 
sigh to observe that the back of the position, 
which was hidden from them, could have 
been easily ascended, and that after all they 
3—2 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>are only elevated in a trifling degree above 
their neighbours. </p>

<p>Immediately beneath the hill was a field of 
clover, and beyond that wheat; next came a 
large wood, extending round the hill to the 
left : a brightly-gleaming stream ran into and 
was lost in the shade of the wood. To the 
right were meadows, reaching as far as the 
eye could see through the crowded trees in 
the hedgerows. Among these Felise recog- 
nised her home, a mile or more distant, the 
roof and chimneys only visible above the 
foliage. The line of the sea appeared where 
another ridge of hill stooped, and rose again. 
It was five miles to the shore. </p>

<p>Turning to her left, Felise went over 
the ridge, and descended the slope, which 
was very gradual, about half-way, till she 
reached the shade of a solitary beech-tree 
growing there. She had been so full of her 
thoughts, and so insensible to her physical 
sensations, that the sun had heated her 
unpleasantly before she was aware of it, 

</p>



<p>and the cool shadow of the beech was a 
relief. She leaned against its smooth trunk, 
and looked over a hollow valley, or plain, 
between several ridges. </p>

<p>They sloped down, one line behind the 
other, and a third across these; a fourth 
farther away, drawn along in those gentle 
outlines that look so easy to copy on paper, 
and are so difficult. The pencil can rarely 
hit the exact curve — there is always a 
tendency to exaggerate; and some of the 
cleverest draughtsmen say the only method 
by w^hich these illusive lines can be rendered 
is to gaze at them, and sketch without look- 
ing at the paper — that is, to let the pencil 
obey the mandate of the eye without the in- 
tervening connection of the mind, yielding 
the faculties entirely to the curve. </p>

<p>This enclosed plain was grass-grown; a 
few hawthorns were scattered about it, and 
beneath where she stood three or four 
beeches grew in an irregular group. She 
was now facing in the opposite direction — 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>her present right was her former left. A 
rude track — merely two ruts in the sward — 
went over the hill on her right. </p>

<p>Just as she was beginning to feel refreshed 
in the coolness, her glance became sensible 
of a movement in the distance. Something 
had crossed over the third ridge, and de- 
scended out of sight into the hollow between 
it and the second. She did not look that 
way in time to see what it was, but supposed 
it to have been a shepherd. </p>

<p>While she leaned against the bole of the 
tree idling, she took out her penknife, a 
slight thing with a mother-of-pearl handle 
and a thin narrow blade. Why are ladies* 
penknives so feebly made ? Directly you 
begin to cut with one, the blade shakes and 
turns, or threatens to go right .back, in spite 
of the spring. </p>

<p>Felise took the blade itself between her 
finger and thumb — as the handle was useless 
she hafted it with her white fingers — and began 
to cut out a slice of the bark of the beech. 

</p>



<p>This tree has a rind, smooth, and readily- 
incised. It is not very thick, yet thick 
enough for a marked notch to be left if a 
strip be cut out. Felise forced the tender 
blade through the bark, and drew two 
parallel lines; then she loosened and tore 
out the thin strip between these, leaving a 
straight perpendicular stroke, or |. The sap 
glistened in the groove. </p>

<p>She did it in mere idleness, quite thought- 
lessly, and without intent. Now see what 
follows from one stroke, and how careful 
people should be before they begin any- 
thing. How can you tell where it may lead 
you } </p>

<p>She contemplated the glistening groove; 
and then, suddenly taking more interest in 
the work, began to draw two more parallel 
lines from the top of the first aslant to the 
right. This incision was somewhat shorter; 
it did not descend quite so far as the | It 
was connected with the first at the top. 
When the strip of bark was peeled out there 

</p>

 </p>

<p>were two glistening lines of sap, in shape 
something Hke half the conventional arrow- 
head on Government property— ^. </p>

<p>In a minute or two she began to add to 
this piece of work a further stroke, ascending 
from the descending one, also to the right, 
which, when peeled, left a strange Ogham- 
like character — ^/. </p>

<p>So soon as she had done this she was 
startled at her own deed, and tried to rub it 
out with her soft hand, which was likely to 
produce much effect on the bark of a tree. 
Rub it as hard as she might, there was the 
incision, and she could not make the bark 
grow again. It is not so easy to undo what 
has once been done. The beech would not 
obliterate that mark in twenty years. The 
very thought increased her trepidation; her 
cheek grew w^arm — everyone who passed 
would see it for twenty years. </p>

<p>The reflection that although they would 
see it they might not understand it, did not 
occur to her. What was so plain to her 

</p>

<p>THE DEWY MORK 41 

</p>

<p>must be evident to others. Guilty people 
always imagine everyone is watching them — 
that everyone detects their secret. Some one 
might be looking now. She looked up, and 
immediately drew close to the tree, hiding 
behind it. </p>

<p>While these labours had been proceeding, 
the figure which had appeared over the third 
ridge, to disappear immediately in the hollow, 
had come up again over the second ridge, 
gone down into the second hollow, and was 
at that moment, when she looked up, descend- 
ing the first slope into the grassy valley at 
her feet. It was a man on horseback. </p>

<p>When he reached the level sward, he 
pushed his horse to full speed, and galloped 
at a great pace straight across the plain. 
He seemed to be making a bee-line across, as 
if intending to ride up the opposite ascent. </p>

<p>Felise involuntarily grasped her penknife 
so tightly that the point pricked her finger. 
This drew her attention to the fact that a 
beech-tree six or eight inches in diameter 

</p>

 </p>

<p>is not shield enough to conceal a well- 
developed form; or else she did not care to 
hide now; or else she was curious to see 
which way he was going; or else — a woman 
has so many reasons for everything she does 
it needs a volume to record them; but what 
she did was to step away from the tree, and 
in front of it, into full view. </p>

<p>Her lips were slightly parted; her form 
rose a little, for she had drawn herself up 
unconsciously to her full height. Her eye- 
lids drooped, and a dreamy expression came 
into . the beautiful grey of her eyes. The 
deep attention with which she gazed partly 
overcame the involuntary muscles, so that 
her heart beat slower, and her breath was 
scarcely drawn. </p>

<p>The horseman rode straight towards the 
hill, but at the foot turned to the right, and 
began to go round the valley. He had 
changed his mind, or thought perhaps that he 
should find no better place for a gallop than 
in this natural circus. 

</p>



<p>Instantly her breath came quicker, and 
her heart beat faster; the nerves had re- 
Heved the muscles. He was not going away 
yet. </p>

<p>In following the outline of the plain, he 
must pass close to her, though much lower, 
and just the other side of the clump of 
beeches. The curve brought him nearer 
and nearer, till she thought he must see her; 
yet he did not appear to do so. Thud, thud 
— an occasional click as the hoofs struck a 
stray flint. He was looking straight at her ! 
Surely he saw her } No; he rode on, and 
his back was turned as the curve of the 
grassy circus took him away. </p>

<p>Felise sighed, and then frowned; she 
could not understand it. She was in the full 
view of everyone who entered the valley; 
she might have been seen from the opposite 
side. Certainly their acquaintance was 
slight; still, he would hardly pass her like 
that. </p>

<p>He had not, in fact, seen her at all, intent 

</p>

 </p>

<p>on his gallop, on his horse, and especially 
upon his own thoughts. But to this circum- 
stance the circular shape of the grassy circus 
contributed; for it is a curious fact that any- 
one standing on the side of a round cavity, 
or inside a round building, may be over- 
looked. </p>

<p>Suppose a circular room; stand close to the 
wall, and if a person glance casually in at 
the door, he will very likely fail to see any- 
one there. Though she was now full in the 
glowing morning sunlight, he did not see 
her; his mind was deeply engaged, and the 
retina is not so sensitive at such moments. 
He was riding fast to ride down his own 
thoughts. </p>

<p>As he came round to the spot where the 
rude track went over the hill to the right, 
Felise's breath came slow again, lest he 
should turn and go along the waggon-road, 
which she knew would have led him home. 
He did not — he came on; and for the 
second time passed her, unconscious of her 

</p>



<p>presence. The nearer he came the higher 
grew the colour in her face and on her neck; 
as the strong horse took him away, so the 
colour faded. When the sunlight suddenly 
breaks forth from a cloud, how instantly the 
flowers bloom afresh ! — so the quick rosy 
flush lit up her delicate neck instantly, but it 
sank back slowly. </p>

<p>In passing the group of trees he was so close 
that the expression of his face was visible. 
His forehead was a little contracted with a 
frown; the line it caused was not deep, so 
that he appeared more hesitating than angry. 
He was undecided; he was seeking decision 
from the unhesitating stride of his horse. </p>

<p>Comparatively his face was small for his 
height; he was not all face, as we see some 
men, whose countenances seem to descend to 
the last button of their waistcoats. His 
head was in just proportion, the summit and 
finish of his shape, as a capital of a 
column. His hair had a shade like the gold 
of Felise's, yet not in the least like hers, for 

</p>

<p>46 THE DEWY MORS 

</p>

<p>his was deeper, browner, as if the sun had 
burnt it, as it had his cheek. Had it not 
been cropped so close, his hair would have 
curled; in the days of Charles II. such hair 
would have been of priceless value to a 
cavalier, curled locks flowing to the 
shoulder. </p>

<p>In outline his countenance was somewhat 
oval, his features fine — a straight nose and 
chin well marked, but not heavy. He had 
a short beard, and his head showed the more 
to advantage, because he had a good neck, 
not too thick. His eyes were blue, and 
framed in firmly-drawn eyebrows and long 
lashes. Though well built, he was slender 
rather than stout; his hands were brown, but 
not large. </p>

<p>The features indicated a temperament 
almost too sensitive, feelings too delicate for 
the roughness of life, which still has to be 
sustained by the rude plough and by labour 
in all weathers, as in the days of our most 
remote ancestors. 

</p>



<p>He rode without a saddle, only a bridle. 
The horse was a large bay, almost large 
enough for a weight-carrying hunter; a hand- 
some creature whose flanks might have been 
polished like fine wood, they shone so. 
Round spots on the skin were less dark than 
the adjacent surface — a dappling or graining 
which varied in hue as the animal turned, 
and the light was reflected at a different 
angle. </p>

<p>The third time he came round to the 
waggon-track he drew rein, as if about to 
change his course, and walked his horse. 
Felise impatiently moved her foot, and the 
dreamy expression in her eyes gave way to 
one of annoyance. But he went by the 
waggon-track, and continued along the 
circus, still at a walking-pace. This time, 
as he approached the beeches, he saw 
her. 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2> 

</p>

<p>I HE knew he did. although no 
alteration was perceptible in his 
manner. Watching him so nar- 
rowly, she felt that he had seen her, yet 
there was no visible change. Eyes that love 
have a way of seeing more than is under- 
stood by scientific people, though they may 
analyze light with the spectrum and the 
polariscope, and all the other appliances 
together. </p>

<p>At the beeches he rode slowly up towards 
her. All at once he turned again, and 
began to descend the hill away from her; 
then, as suddenly, slipped off his horse to 

</p>



<p>his feet, and walked towards her up the 
slope. 

' Good-morning !^ </p>

<p>He did not offer his hand; their previous 
acquaintance was extremely slight. She held 
out hers, and he took it. 

* Can I direct you ?' he said, a little 
awkwardly. 

' Oh, I know the way !' 

' I did not know; I thought ' 

* I came up to see the sunrise,* she said, 
explaining; * but I was too late.* 

* It is a beautiful morning,* said he. </p>

<p>No very brilliant conversation yet; as a 
matter of fact, people who are t&te-d-tHe for 
the first time in their lives do not talk 
brilliantly. Much, however, may be con- 
veyed by tone and manner. </p>

<p>He did not look at her more than courtesy 
demanded : he looked at the sward, at the 
tree, anywhere but at her; yet his nature 
was truthful. </p>

<p>She looked straight in his face; she did </p>

<p>VOL. I. 4 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h2> 

</p>

<p>iJHE knew he did, although no 
alteration was perceptible in his 
manner. Watching him so nar- 
rowly, she felt that he had seen her, yet 
there was no visible change. Eyes that love 
have a way of seeing more than is under- 
stood by scientific people, though they may 
analyze light with the spectrum and the 
polari scope, and all the other appliances 
together. </p>

<p>At the beeches he rode slowly up towards 
her. All at once he turned again, and 
began to descend the hill away from her; 
then, as suddenly, slipped off his horse to 

</p>

 51 

</p>

<p>to feed on the sweet sward. She stroked 
him, and admired him. There was an 
emphasis in her manner as if she would 
rather have stroked certain brown-gold locks 
near her. She asked him twenty questions 
about his horse Ruy. </p>

<p>He answered all, but merely answered 
them, without any enthusiasm or desire to 
continue the conversation. Twice he said 
time was going on, and touched his watch- 
chain, but did not look at his watch for 
courtesy's sake. </p>

<p>Felise glanced hastily round to find some 
subject to talk of. The trees — what trees 
were they } She knew perfectly well. 

* Beeches,' he said; * they grow on a 
chalky soil.' 

* Where does that road lead to ?' pointing 
to the waggon-track. 

* To Welcombe.* </p>

<p>As if she had not followed it twenty times, 
till she could look down upon his house. 
Anything to make him stay, to make him </p>

<p>4—2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>speak, that she might see him, and hear his 
voice. 

'You have not called for a very long 
time.* </p>

<p>As if he was on visiting terms. He had 
called once on mere formal business. 

* How is Mr. Goring ?* he was obliged to 
ask. </p>

<p>Then followed three or four sentences — 
three or four moments more — about her 
uncle^s health, and his fondness for planting 
trees. 

* Why does he not look at me ?* she 
thought. * Can I not make him look at me ?* 
Then aloud, sharply : * Mr. Barnard F </p>

<p>He could not help but look, at the sound of 
his name. He saw a face full of wistful 
meaning upturned to him. Her golden hair 
had strayed a little on her forehead, three or 
four glistening threads wandered over it, 
asking some loving hand to smooth them 
back. The white brow without a stain, a 
mark, a line; no kiss there but must be 

</p>



<p>purified by the touch; it was an altar which 
could not be tainted — which would turn taint 
to purity. Large grey eyes that seemed to 
see him only — to whom the whole world, the 
hills round them, the sky over, was not — 
eyes that drew his towards them, and held 
his vision in defiance of his will. If once 
you look over the side of a boat into the 
clear sea, you must continue looking — the 
depth fascinates the mind. Some depth in 
her rapt gaze fascinated him. </p>

<p>Her eyebrows arched — not too much 
arched — the curve of the cheek, roseate, 
almost but not quite smiling, carried his 
thought downwards to her breathing lips. 
Her lips were apart, rich, dewy, curved; 
they kissed him by their expression, if not in 
deed. In that instant his heart throbbed 
violently; the beat rose to thrice its usual 
rate. </p>

<p>The first moment of awaking to a happy 
morning, the daylight that means a joyful 
event; the first view of the sea in youth, when 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the blue expanse brings tears to the eyes — in 
these there is some parallel to the sudden, 
the extreme, and the delicious feeling that 
shot through him. To reach the ideal of 
human happiness it is necessary to be for 
the moment unconscious of all, except the 
cause. For that moment he had no con- 
sciousness except of her, such was the power 
of her passion glowing in her face. </p>

<p>Even Felise, eager to retain him with her, 
and unhesitatingly employing every means, 
could not maintain that gaze. Unabashed 
and bold with love, she was too true, too 
wholly his, to descend to any art. Her 
gaze, passionate as it was, was natural and 
unstudied; therefore it could not continue. 
Her eyes drooped, and he was released. </p>

<p>Immediately, as if stung to a sense of his 
honour, he placed his hands on the horse, 
sprang up, and seated himself. 

* I — I have much to do,' he said, em- 
barrassed to the last degree, and holding out 
his hand. 

</p>



<p>She would not see it. She took the 
bridle, and stroked Ruy's neck, placing her 
cheek almost against the glossy skin. Obey- 
ing the pressure of his knee, Ruy began to 
move slowly. She walked beside him, hold- 
ing the bridle; but Ruy s long stride soon 
threatened to leave her behind. For very 
shame, he could not but stay. At a touch 
Ruy halted. She looked up at him; he 
carefully avoided her glance. The horse, 
growing restless, began to move again; 
again, for courtesy's sake, he was compelled 
to check him. Not a word had been spoken 
while this show was proceeding. </p>

<p>Barnard^s face grew hot with impatience, 
or embarrassment, or a sense that he was 
doing wrong in some manner not at the 
moment apparent. Sideways, she saw his 
glowing cheek. It only inflamed her heart 
the more; the bright colour, like the scarlet 
tints in a picture, lit up his face. Next he 
controlled himself, and forced his features 
and attitude to an impassive indifference. 

</p>

 </p>

<p>He would sit like a statue till it pleased her 
to let him go. Ruy pulled hard to get his 
neck free that he might feed again. </p>

<p>She stooped and gathered him some grass 
and gave it to him. Twice she fed him. 
Barnard remained silent and impassive. 
Still not a word between them. The third 
time she gathered a handful of grass, as she 
rose her shoulder brushed his knee. She 
stood there, and did not move. Her warm 
shoulder just touched him, no more; her 
golden hair was very near. She drew over 
a tuft of Ruy's mane, and began to deftly 
plait it. Barnard's face, in defiance of him- 
self, flushed scarlet; his very ears burned. 
He stole half a glance sideways; how lovely 
her roseate cheek, the threads of her golden 
hair, against the bay's neck ! Ruy was turn- 
ing his nostrils round to touch her, and ask 
for more grass. She swiftly plaited his 
mane. </p>

<p>At that moment another horse neighed 
over the hill; they both looked round — no 

</p>



<p>one was in sight. But Ruy answered with a 
neigh, and in the same instant stepped 
forward. Barnard pressed his knee; Ruy 
began to move faster. Barnard bowed; his. 
voice was temporarily inarticulate, and he 
was gone. </p>

<p>In a few minutes, he gained the waggon- 
track; and, without looking back, pressed 
Ruy at a rapid pace up the ascent, and dis- 
appeared over the summit. She went back 
to the beech, and in the shadow watched the 
next ridge. In five minutes man and horse 
came into view, climbed, and went down, 
like a ship at sea beneath the horizon. She 
saw them for the third time passing over the 
third ridge, and then, knowing that she should 
not see them any farther, turned to go. She 
soon regained the lane, where a farmer on 
horseback overtook and passed her, raising 
his hat. It was his horse that had neighed 
to Ruy. </p>

<p>Felise walked swiftly, and in the centre of 
the lane. The dew had dried from the blue 

</p>

 </p>

<p>veronica and the cowslip. Instead of wander- 
ing from side to side, looking at the flowers, 
and touching the green sprays, she went 
straight on. She did not notice a black- 
bird's noisy note as he sprang up startled 
from among the young brake fern. The 
oak-trunk which had formed her seat was 
not looked at. Her mind was full of one 
thought, and she did not regard outward cir- 
cumstances. </p>

<p>A shepherd with his dog at a gateway saw 
her go by; a man riding a thill-horse met 
her, and forced his horse, with the harness 
hanging and jingling, up into the nettles and 
brambles, to give her a royal right of road; 
ten or twelve haymakers, men and women, 
were filing across the lane out of one field 
across to another. They halted, and let her 
pass through their ranks. Some children 
with them shouted joyously at the sight of 
her. Neither the touching of hats, nor the 
curtseys, nor the voices of the children 
calling to her, attracted her a moment. Her 

</p>



<p>mind was full of one thought, and she saw 
nothing. </p>

<p>At home she immediately ran upstairs, 
shut the door, and sat down. In another 
moment she got up to look at herself in the 
glass. Her cheeks were scarlet, partly the 
exertion, partly sunburn, partly excitement. 
The sun had scorched her face; love had 
scorched her heart. What had she done ? 
Was it well, or wrong ? Did he under- 
stand ? He musi have understood. Yet, 
perhaps, he might not have done so; he 
would not look at her. Their eyes had met 
but once. </p>

<p>Her face, her neck, flushed scarlet; she 
felt as if her very fingers tingled with shame. 
That she should have shown him so plainly 
her meaning — that she should have actually 
held his horse by the bridle to stay him from 
leaving her ! </p>

<p>With as violent a revulsion of feeling she 
laughed, caught up a brush, and brushed 
her hair, and revelled in the thought of her 

</p>

<p>6o THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>boldness. She wished she had done 
more. 

* Why did I not hold his hand instead 

# </p>

<p>of his horse's bridle ?* she asked her- 
self. </p>

<p>Suddenly she burst into tears, leant back, 
and became perfectly pale. A faintness 
came over her; everything before her eyes 
was black as if it was night. She did not 
faint — she slowly recovered; and, going to 
the window, began to sing in a low voice. 
A girl came round the corner of the 
house. 

' Mary, bring me a rose for my hair.' 
In that simple country household, Mary 
Shaw was their only attendant. She was, 
however, young and good-looking, pleasant, 
and almost a friend. There was much 
affection between them. 

* You must be main lear [very hungry]/ 
said Mary, when she brought the rose; * you 
have been up Ashpen.* 

* I am — very hungry,' said Felise. 

</p>

 6i 

* Such a nice breakfast waiting for you/ 

* I couldn't eat a morsel/ said Felise. 
* How long the days are ! I wish it was 
night !' 

' It isn't seven yet/ said Mary. 

* Oh dear ! These summer days are so </p>

<p>long r 

' Yesterday you was saying how glad you 
were they was so long/ 

* So I am/ 

* There now ! who's to know what you 
means ? That's how all good-looking ladies 
goes on — that's how they worries the men- 

. folk/ 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h2> 



|FTER Barnard had ridden over the 
third ridge, uphill and down, at 
a merciless rate, he checked his 
speed : first to a trot, then to a walk, and 
finally halted altogether. Next he turned 
Ruy's head away ft-om home (a change Ruy 
did not much like), and slowly retraced the 
route he had come away from Felise 
Goring. </p>

<p>But at first not very rapidly. It is the 
first few steps that are difficult, even in sweet 
things : hesitation, trembling, indecision ac- 
companies them. Once well started on the 
flowery path, and the pace constantly ac- 
celerates. In ten minutes he was at full 

</p>



<p>gallop back towards her. He had not the 
least idea what he was going to do — what 
excuse he should make for returning — 
whether he would go so near as to speak, or 
what. </p>

<p>He soon saw that she had left the spot. 
He rode up to the solitary beech and dis- 
mounted, mechanically repeating what he 
had done when she was there. So great 
criminals go through a dumb show in their 
sleep of guilt; so great pleasure leads us to 
step again in our happy foot-marks. He 
looked at the beech, because she had been 
there, and caught sight of the incision in 
the bark. What was this ? </p>

<p>The cuts were so thin, he guessed at once 
it was her work : a man would have slashed 
out larger strips. He traced the lines with 
his finger : one straight descending stroke, 
and a small V attached to it at the top on 
the right side. When his finger reached the 
end of the ascending groove, involuntarily 
he drew it down the uncut bark, as if another 



•64 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>straight stroke had been there, and recog- 
nised in an instant what the incomplete 
character stood for; i.e.y M. A capital M — 
his own initial; Martial Barnard. </p>

<p>He took out his own knife, and cut the 
stroke necessary to complete the letter. </p>

<p>Hurrying to Ruy, who was feeding, he 
got up, and rode round the hill, and into the 
lane. Though so far behind at starting, his 
speed was thrice hers; he thought he could 
easily overtake her. But she had progressed 
farther than he anticipated, and he found him- 
self near her home without seeing anything 
of her. Then he asked himself what should 
he do if he did overtake her ? Could he 
ride up — could he speak to her ? What 
could he say ? </p>

<p>At this moment when Barnard let his 
horse walk, Felise was scarcely a hundred 
yards in front, but concealed by a turn of 
the lane. 

' M,' he said to himself, * might stand for 
many other names — for Martin, for Mark; 

</p>

 65 

</p>

<p>perhaps, after all, it was only a freak — an 
accidental resemblance to an M, and no 
letter was intended/ </p>

<p>But the look — the look which had held 
him; the depth of those beautiful eyes; the 
wistful expression of the face — he saw it 
before him as he saw it at the moment. 
Should he ever forget it ? — he felt that it 
would never fade. As he thought of it, he 
looked down, and saw the plaited piece of 
mane. He cut it off, and put it in his 
pocket-book. </p>

<p>But in the pocket-book there were dates, 
and entries referring to — no matter; he 
took the plait from the pocket-book, and 
placed it with his watch. </p>

<p>His conduct } To forget past vows; to 
follow another woman; to let his mind dwell 
upon this new face — could anything be more 
despicable ? </p>

<p>He turned Ruy with some violence, and 
walked him back up the lane. But why 
should he be better than others } Why set </p>

<p>VOL. I. K 

</p>

 </p>

<p>up to be so ultra-honourable ? Was he not 
free in the eyes of the world ? </p>

<p>As he pondered, still with her face before 
him, he saw a handkerchief, whits and 
delicate of texture, almost under Ruy's 
hoofs; for the horse, left to himself, had 
chosen to walk on the sward near the hedge. 
Martial got down, and picked up the hand- 
kerchief. There were the initials * F, G. * in 
the corner. It exhaled a slight perfume, 
the sweet delicate odour of the beautiful 
woman to whom it belonged, and he kissed 
it. With this he might ride up to her house 
even; it would be an excuse. </p>

<p>No; he could not — he must not. He re- 
mounted, and pursued his way along the 
lane, round the hill, back to the solitary 
beech with the glistening letter cut in its 
bark. </p>

<p>He reproved himself for permitting him- 
self even to think of her; so he spoke aloud, 
as it were, mentally. At the same moment 
he was inquiring. Did that look mean any- 

</p>



<p>thing ? If so, was it real — was it true ? Or 
was she heartless, and merely using a lovely 
face to play upon him ? Surely she was too 
beautiful; and yet — why should she select 
him for such a glance ? Their acquaintance 
was but trivial, and Barnard, to do him 
justice, was without conceit. She could not 
mean it; and yet, and yet ! </p>

<p>And so the summer day wore on. To one 
it was too long, because she did not know 
how long it would be before she saw him 
again; the other took no heed of the 
glorious sunlight, because a face floated 
before him. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2> 

</p>

<p>SOME ten or twelve days afterwards 
Felise started to bathe, telling 
^^^ Shaw to follow in a quarter of an 
hour with her towels. It was about eleven, 
and all the dew long since dry; the garden- 
path was hedged on either side with 
peonies, whose large flowers hung heavily. 
Open the foHo-petals like the leaves of a 
book, and you will find the imperial purple 
of the heavens at sunset deep within the 
volume. </p>

<p>Beyond the peonies her skirt rustled on 
grass, grown high under apple-trees, and the 
shade of the apple-boughs crossed her 
shoulder as she walked. She saw her uncle. 

</p>



<p>Mr. Goring, at a distance, busy at his bees. 
A swarm hung from an apple-bough, and, 
clad in his net, he was charming them into 
a hive. Gardening and bee-keeping, plant- 
ing trees, and all similar pleasure-work, is of 
no interest unless you do it yourself. He 
did everything himself, and knew every 
shoot, because he had himself pruned the 
branch. </p>

<p>Felise went on along a filbert-walk — 
Goring's own planting — then out by a yew- 
hedge higher than her head, and past the 
sundial. On the northern side of the sun- 
dial, under a sycamore, with the tall yew- 
hedge in the rear, a seat was placed; it was 
Felise's favourite resort, because there was a 
view of the distant hills, and in the afternoon 
of the sunset, from this place. He had 
planted the grounds so thickly with trees 
that this was almost the only spot where a 
view could be obtained. </p>

<p>Next she walked beside a hawthorn-hedge. 
Goring had made a gravel walk parallel with 

</p>

<p>70 THE DEWY MORS, </p>

<p>the hedge, which led through the meadow to 
a copse at hand. There was a narrow valley 
between two slopes covered with wood; a 
copse had always been there, but Goring 
planted the summit each side with beech, 
and dotted American scarlet oaks about, 
besides cutting green walks among the 
ash, where, on turning a comer, you came 
unexpectedly on a bed of flowers or straw- 
berries. </p>

<p>So soon as she reached the copse and had 
put her hand on the wicket-gate she heard 
the rush of falling waters. For some reason 
it was not audible till the wicket was reached, 
thence at every step in the wood it increased 
in volume of sound. A little stream from 
the chalk hill ran through the wood; years 
and years ago it had been banked up, and 
a pool made, in which there were trout. 
The pool was large enough for a boathouse; 
by the boathouse was a special compart- 
ment constructed for Felise, for bathing 
purposes. 

</p>



<p>Here she had learnt to swim; Goring 
taught her. Surrounded by wooded hills, 
and absolutely private, there could not have 
been a choicer place for bathing. The sea 
was so near — five miles is very little to coun- 
try people — and Felise displayed so wilful a 
resolution to go out upon it at all times and 
seasons, that Goring never felt safe till she 
could swim. Of course she beat her teacher. 
* Papa ' — he was only her uncle, though, as 
she had never known her parents, she called 
him papa — was getting grey. She could 
beat him swimming — three to one. </p>

<p>Felise moved more slowly in the ash-wood, 
listening to the rush of the water as it fell 
over the hatch of the pond. It rendered her 
thoughtful. Climbing up the embankment 
which held the water in, she sat down on 
the beam of the hatch. Behind her the 
water dropped in an arch, ten feet deep, into 
a gully nearly crossed by ferns, which per- 
petually nodded. The spray struck them 
and bent them down; they rose up and were 

</p>

 </p>

<p>struck down again; and so on all day and 
night. </p>

<p>Before her the pool stretched out, an acre 
or two, broad at this end and deep, and 
narrowing up to a point where the stream ran 
in. The wood came down close on three 
sides; on the fourth, at her left hand, was a 
narrow strip of sward. The boathouse, on 
the right, was in shadow, being overhung by- 
beeches; all the rest of the mere in bright 
sunshine. </p>

<p>Felise put up her sunshade and listened to 
the rush of the cataract. Though it seemed 
to fill the ear, the notes of a blackbird in 
the wood were distinct above it; they pierced 
the diffused sound of the waterfall. A chaf- 
finch perched close to her; there were some 
long-winged flies floating about; the finch 
darted out and took these almost from under 
her parasol. </p>

<p>She was thinking. She had been up to 
the downs, and had visited the beech-tree 
three times since. She looked for her mark 

</p>



<p>cut in the bark, and found it had been com- 
pleted. Some one had added the stroke 
which rendered it intelligible as an * M.* Who 
could have done that ? Her first thought 
was that it was Martial; he had returned, 
seen what she had been doing, guessed, and 
finished it. </p>

<p>This was what had actually taken place; 
but first thoughts are not always accepted. 
If he had done it, then her secret was out. 
Could it be called a secret after that inter- 
view } Her cheeks burned; she had so de- 
sired he should know, yet now she supposed 
he did know, she recoiled. For a moment 
only, however. If he had guessed and had 
completed the letter, then she was only too 
glad. </p>

<p>But had he ? He had tried so hard to get 
away from her. He did not take the least 
interest in her. Possibly he thought her bold 
— troublesomely bold; then he would not be 
likely to have returned to the spot where she 
had been a weariness to him. It must have 

</p>

 </p>

<p>been some shepherd lad whiling away the 
slow hours in the shadow of the beech who 
had carved the last stroke of the letter. </p>

<p>Yet she did not know. Heart said one 
thing : thought another. Heart said, ' He 
did it; he is not fut^e indifferent to me; he 
has been here; he knows — he understands.' 
Thought said, * He is entirely indifferent; my 
face, my form does not please him; why 
should he come back ? Oh no ! this was the 
work of a shepherd lad.' Yet she did not 
know. But if he had returned once, perhaps 
he would come again; so she went to the 
place three times, waited for an hour or two, 
and saw nothing of him. Of course not; he 
did not care. He neyer gave her a thought. </p>

<p>Yet she did not know. He might have 
revisited the spot at some other time of the 
day. So the battledore and shuttlecock of 
argument and suggestion continued in her 
mind. But the fact was indisputable that 
she did not see him; nor did he call to see 
her. 

</p>



<p>If he really understood her — if he cared to 
understand her — surely he would have called. 
Though their families were not on visiting 
terms, a gentleman can generally make some 
pretence if he wishes to call. He had not 
been — he had not even ridden by, for she had 
been in the garden, and watching the road 
half the time. He did not want to come. 
Therefore it was not he who had completed 
the letter on the tree. </p>

<p>He did not care about her. She picked up 
a small stone and pitched it at a lazy trout 
idling at the surface of the still water. The 
fish shot away into the depths instantly; but 
her thoughts did not go away into oblivion. </p>

<p>He did not care for her. But he must 
care for her; she must make him care. It 
was impossible to influence him unless she 
could see him, speak to him, convey her 
heart to him, not only by words, but by those 
innumerable little ways which speak louder. </p>

<p>The weeks would lengthen into months, 
the months into years, and still perhaps he 

</p>

 </p>

<p>would not come; he would never care for her 
unless she could converse with him. In- 
fluence depends wholly on personal contact. 
No magic is known by which one person 
can attract another if outside the sphere of 
personal communication. Unseen, unspoken, 
how affect ? </p>

<p>She began to feel the immeasurable weight 
of separation which has slowly ground so 
many weary hearts to the very dust of 
desolation. </p>

<p>She realized for the first time in her life 
the powerlessness of women. They cannot 
stir, they cannot move in the matters that 
concern them most dearly; they are helpless; 
at the mercy of the petty events called cir- 
cumstance. If by any happy chance circum- 
stance threw her into Martial's society, in 
time he might love her. By chance only. 
How many years till that chance happened ? 
Possibly enough it might never occur at all. </p>

<p>Time would go on. He would see fresh 
faces — faces that pleased him better — he 

</p>



<p>would be wiled away by some other woman, 
fortunate in the fate of circumstance. A 
thousand little incidents might drift him 
farther away than he was now. She could 
not interfere. Strong and resolute as she 
was, what could she do ? </p>

<p>Felise instinctively glanced all round her; 
she looked at the wood; at the path down 
the embankment; the nodding ferns; at the 
beeches far up on the summit each side; 
across at the willow-grown streamlet. She 
felt suddenly alone. She was by herself, not 
merely in the physical sense of no other 
person being near, but alone morally. 
Recognising that she could not command 
the society she desired, forced her to feel 
absolutely solitary. A crowd would have 
made no difference, she would have felt the 
same. </p>

<p>She could wait ? Yes, like * Mariana in 
the moated grange,' in the sunshine, in the 
evening, in the morning, still with the same 
burden on her lips, * He cometh not.' 

</p>

 </p>

<p>Hundreds, shall we not say rather thou- 
sands, do so wait. I saw a face, a woman's 
face, at a window to-day, as I was strolling 
past a residence the style of which betokened 
wealth. Upon that face waiting had set its 
seal unmistakably. She was waiting — she 
had been waiting years. No end to waiting. 
Such faces are common enough. Woman's 
life seems to be nothing but waiting, some- 
times. </p>

<p>She had unconsciously placed her elbow 
on her knee, and leant her face on her hand; 
the very thought of waiting bowed her down 
into an attitude of pensive regret. </p>

<p>How bitter it is to be a woman sometimes ! 
On the other hand, no one triumphs like a 
woman when she does triumph. Caesars 
spoils and car rolling through applauding 
Rome, are but gewgaws to the triumph of a 
woman. 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">IX</h2> 

</p>

<p>I HE very thought of the waiting de- 
pressed her; as if a darkness had 
fallen on her heart in the midst of 
the sunshine. Her gloom had increased till 
it verged on anger — the two are near together; 
gloom and anger are like twins. She grew 
angry, she knew not with what, and stood 
up. The blackbird who had been singing 
uttered a loud ' ching-ching,' as if alarmed at 
her change of attitude; a moorhen at the 
other end of the little lake scuttled into the 
bulrush-flags. </p>

<p>She stood up in the sunshine, lowering her 
sunshade, drawn to her full height, her 
features set, a slight flush on her cheeks. A 

</p>

<p>8o THE DEWY MORN, </p>

<p>silent and unchangeable resolve had been 
forming in her mind. She would, she must, 
she would have him with her. If he did not 
love her — if he could not love her — there 
was the end. But he should be in her 
society; he should feel her presence; he 
should see the meaning in her eyes; if she 
had any beauty he should come within reach 
of its power. He should talk with her, sit 
by her, do as she was doing; not once, or 
now and then — continually, till by degrees his 
heart warmed, if it could warm towards her. </p>

<p>The forms of society were nothing to her 
— she had already broken them. What the 
world said did not trouble her. She was 
reckless, ready for the most violent effort. 
She did not care; she would. She did not 
stamp her foot, the resolve was too deep to 
require a tangible emphasis; there was no 
fear of its vanishing. </p>

<p>Her features resumed their natural ex- 
pression, her attitude became easy, but her 
cheeks grew hotter. Though she looked 

</p>

 8i </p>

<p>Straight in front she saw nothing. Her 
whole consciousness was rapt in resolution. </p>

<p>It lasted a moment, and then the question 
arose, How ? </p>

<p>Immediately she raised her sunshade, and 
sat down again. It is curious that when we 
act, we stand; when we think, we sit. The 
difference is discernible in actors on the stage : 
so long as they address each other standing, 
the play is followed with interest; the moment 
they sit down, though the dialogue be ever 
so brilliant, people take up their opera-glasse 
and look round them. </p>

<p>Stage-players should always stand — it lends 
a force to the smallest incident. To lie down 
is more effective than to sit, it is next to 
standing; as, for example, the power Sarah 
Bernhardt exercises extended on a sofa — not 
a chair. </p>

<p>Felise thought and sat down. She asked 
herself, How could this be accomplished ? 
She thrust away from her mind the contem- 
plation of the powerlessness of women, and </p>

<p>VOL. I. 6 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>concentrated her ideas upon the way it could 
be done. She would not submit; she would 
not wait, to the burden of * He cometh not.' 
She would force circumstances to her will, 
and mould her fate in her hands. The pre- 
cipice was perpendicular, yet she would scale 
it It was natural for a woman to attempt 
the impossible. </p>

<p>All the strength of her limbs seemed to 
support her resolution. Should she who 
could race up the steep hillside, who could 
swim, not only in this level lake, but in the 
swelling sea, who could run apace with the 
hounds — should she tamely stand by and see 
her prize fall to another winner in life's 
battle ? </p>

<p>The strong limbs, the deep chest, the in- 
tense sense of life within her, urged her to 
the effort, and promised success. </p>

<p>Her face would never be seen at a window 
as the face I observed. Her nature was too 
strong, too vehement; if she failed, she would 
be utterly broken; if she failed, the end would 

</p>

 83 

</p>

<p>come quickly. She could not live without 
her love. </p>

<p>Some dim presentiment of this perhaps 
passed through her mind, for a tear came into 
her eyes. If he could not love her when she 
had gained her immediate object, what then ? 
Of that possibility she dared not think. </p>

<p>The question was, How ? How obtain 
access to him — how bring him into her 
society ? Not for once, or twice, but day by 
day. To be with him hour after hour; her 
heart beat faster at the idea of it. To look 
into his face; to hear his voice; to come to 
understand his thoughts; to have one exist- 
ence with him — the happiness would be 
almost too great. That alone — merely to be 
in his society — would be sufficient reward for 
all the sacrifice she could make. It must be, 
but how ? </p>

<p>Has anyone thought for an instant upon 
the extreme difficulty of knowing a person ? 
Really to know him, or her, to speak in a 
friendly way, to visit and re- visit, and con- </p>

<p>6—2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>verse without reserve, and become company 
with, and part of their group. Acquaintance 
is often difficult enough to acquire; to really 
come to know a stranger, or comparative 
stranger, is most difficult. </p>

<p>People's entire destiny depends upon those 
whom they know. One's friends lift one or 
depress one to their level. A genius is 
raised up to the skies, or struggles unnoticed 
in the grimy ranks accordingly as his ac- 
quaintances happen to be first-class or third- 
rate. Some men are fortunate from their 
youth, and are thrust forward upon the gilded 
shoulders of money and title till the world 
accepts them. So all-important is it on what 
level we begin life. </p>

<p>We cannot select our company. Our 
power in this matter is simply negative; we 
can avoid what is notoriously bad, but we 
cannot thrust ourselves in upon the good. 
A soldier may steadfastly refrain from the 
canteen, but he cannot invite himself to the 
officers' mess. 

</p>



<p>The greatest difficulty in the world is to 
know people. How are you even to let them 
understand that you wish to know them — 
which would often expedite the desired end 
very considerably ? Reflect upon the vast 
multitude of people who enter and depart 
from London every day in 2,200 trains. 
How can you know any one of these ? </p>

<p>There is a pretty woman in every train. 
This is a physiological fact which I have 
often observed, but how are you going to get 
introduced to them ? </p>

<p>It is possible to be invited to the same 
dinner-party, to belong to the same club, the 
same hunt, to go so far as to salute whenever 
meeting, and yet not to know one another. 
The cordial greeting, the pressing invitation, 
the glad spirit is wanting. It is a nod and 
nothing more. </p>

<p>But for a woman to introduce herself to 
a man — to select her acquaintance and her 
friend from the ranks of the other sex — is it 
not almost impossible ? 

</p>

 </p>

<p>We live in little groups. These groups 
have not been formed upon any definite 
principle; they have grown up in the course 
of time, partly from family causes, partly from 
casual introductions, also from causes that 
defy analysis. Each of these little groups is 
complete in itself, and those outside it cannot 
get in. Observe a train, you will find that 
it runs upon rails; another train may be near, 
but cannot move itself upon those rails; each 
train has its metals. These groups remain 
in their grooves. </p>

<p>Yet the singularity of the thing is that 
although perseverance, application and ad- 
mitted merit will not prevail to get an out- 
sider into such a group, the merest outsider 
may enter at a moment s notice by some 
little chance. </p>

<p>Women consequently marry inside this 
group, with some one with whom they have 
been brought into contact through family 
connections. Or else they leap, as it were, 
quite beyond the group, and are carried away 

</p>

 87 

</p>

<p>by a total outsider accidentally met. If they 
do not belong to any group, and do not meet 
an outsider, then they have to continue un- 
married. They cannot choose their friends, 
or their partners; they can refuse (the nega- 
tive); they cannot select. </p>

<p>Some method is clearly required by which 
people without scandal or solecism might 
communicate with each other, and make it 
understood that they wish to be acquainted. 
At the present moment, even a man cannot 
ride up to a house and say, *Sir, I admire 
your niece (or your daughter). Permit me to 
visit you. So-and-so are my references. I 
await your reply after you have made in- 
quiries.' But why not ? It would be quite 
reasonable; people would soon agree to the 
custom. </p>

<p>However, the ladies would demand a 
corresponding right. Could they not be 
permitted to send a card with a few litho- 
graphed words in a conventional sentence 
amounting to a permission to visit them ? 

</p>

 </p>

<p>The very novelists, with all their ingenuity, 
have been troubled for ages to discover a 
means of introducing their characters to each 
other. Sometimes they cause their heroes 
to break a leg and be carried into a stranger's 
house, where they are nursed, and win a 
heart. Or a horse runs away with the lady, 
who is gallantly rescued. In real life such 
events are as rare as legacies. A lady, in 
Boccaccio's collection of stories, ingeniously 
uses the confessional as a means of securing 
a lover, showing that the difficulty was felt 
even then. </p>

<p>Half the flower-shows, the working-parties, 
the * causes * got up and pursued so zealously, 
are only supported because people uncon- 
sciously recognise in them a means of mixing 
with each other. 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2> </p>

<p>j|HERE was nothing in the position 
of Felise Goring or Martial 
Barnard to prevent their know- 
ing each other. They were much in 
the same position. Felise depended upon 
her uncle, who possessed a comfortable 
house, the most beautiful grounds (laid out 
and planted by himself); who could provide 
a bountiful table, but could scarce summon 
up a coin. She had little beyond some fine 
pearls, once her mother's. As for Barnard, 
he occupied a very large farm; his family 
had been once well-to-do, but he really had 
nothing. Outwardly he was a desirable 
match — his family had had something of a 

</p>

<p>9c THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>county reputation — financially speaking, he 
was undesirable. His education, his manners, 
his ideas, were much above his pocket. An 
impecunious pair; neither of them had any- 
thing to recommend them. </p>

<p>But there was no obstacle whatever in 
their position to prevent their knowing each 
other, except the insurmountable one that 
they did not know each other in the 
social sense. Their families had not visited; 
their connections did not belong to the same 
group. The houses were not more than 
three miles apart, but they were effectually 
isolated. Such cases must occur to every- 
one; there must be thousands of them. 
There was nothing between — only separa- 
tion. </p>

<p>They had met thrice. Once in the pre- 
vious autumn, when Felise was following the 
harriers on foot, for she ran as swiftly as 
Atalanta. They sat near each other at lunch. 
Once Barnard called upon Mr. Goring in 
the winter in reference to some formal 

</p>



<p>business about the water-course. The third 
time was on Ashpen Hill, just after sunrise. 
There had been no formal introduction, and 
there was nothing in these accidental meet- 
ings likely to lead to their meeting again. </p>

<p>The difficulty lay in the vacancy, as it 
were — the lack of anything to lay hold of. 
No slender thread existed by which com- 
munication could be effected. Without a 
doubt Felise would not have hesitated to 
have gone at once straight up to his hall- 
door; but then — oh, the cunning of woman ! 
— she knew (their cunning comes without 
teaching) that to be too openly forward, 
especially if there were witnesses, as there 
would be, would probably defeat the object. </p>

<p>Still there was nothing she would not do if 
necessary. She must; she could not live 
without his society. But if possible it should 
be effected insidiously, so that the object 
might not be too immediately displayed. </p>

<p>Felise ran over several expedients in her 
mind as she sat on the beam of the hatch. 

</p>

 </p>

<p>Feigning an interest in some old book, and 
pretending to have heard that he possessed 
it, she could call and ask for the loan. 
Walking a long distance she could become 
faint and weary while passing, and beg to 
rest. She might trespass on the grounds 
and sketch till she was seen. Most likely 
some one s curiosity would bring them out to 
talk to her. </p>

<p>There were some ladies at his house, 
cousins she believed, not very young; these 
might be useful if once spoken to. On the 
other hand, very likely they would detect her 
purpose, and set obstacles in her way. Or 
she could whip the stream for trout till she 
crossed his path as he went his rounds about 
his farm; he could hardly avoid coming to 
speak to her. Perhaps he would attend some 
of the public entertainments occasionally 
given in the town of Maasbury, a few miles 
distant. She could manage to leave the 
building at the same moment, and confront 
him in the doorway. 

</p>

 93 

^^^^M^i^^^^^^^— I MM^ — ■ I ■■ ■ ■■■— I ^ m » ■■ ■■ ^^^^^mm m m i — — ^i^^— — </p>

<p>She must see him, and he must see her 
face. Perhaps if he saw it frequently, it 
might please him. </p>

<p>She went and knelt at the edge of the still 
pool, and looked over at her own reflection in 
the water. Felise made no affected secret to 
herself of her beauty; she knew that she had 
beauty, and did not conceal it from herself in 
any form of self-depreciation. She delighted 
in it; it pleased her intense, vigorous life to 
look at it. She enjoyed a sensuous repose 
while contemplating her face, or even her 
bare arms sometimes as she dressed her hair. 
She enjoyed herself. </p>

<p>Her eyelids drooped slightly, the expres- 
sion of her eyes became softer, her lips parted 
in the very least; it was something like how 
she looked when love was throbbing in her 
veins — only not so vehement, because she was 
receiving instead of giving. Her own exist- 
ence came back to her. The glow of youth and 
loveliness was reflected back into her mind. </p>

<p>How beautiful it must be to be beautiful ! 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>How delicious it is, even for the plainest of 
us, to sit before that which is beautiful, and 
sink into a semi-unconscious state of happi- 
ness ! For it is happiness to gaze at that 
which is lovely, whether a living face or a 
pictured one. </p>

<p>What lovely faces some of the Italian 
painters have chosen for the Madonna ! No 
theological persuasion is needed to induce us 
to gaze at her. Such beauty naturally creates 
a sense of delicate reverence; it delights and 
purifies at once. An evil thought is im- 
possible before it; the heart, for the moment 
at least, becomes morally beautiful in corre- 
spondence with the pictured face. </p>

<p>Felise gazed down at herself in the still 
clear water, and enjoyed her own beauty. 
She loved herself for being beautiful This 
was apart from thought of Martial; it was 
herself for herself; just as she joyed in her 
strength when she swam, in her swiftness 
when she ran. A sensuous and yet a deli- 
cate pleasure. 

</p>



<p>And Martial ? It was a triumph to her to 
look at herself — he must see her face fre- 
quently; could he refuse to love ? </p>

<p>But men vary in their standards of loveli- 
ness, and some do not apparently care for it 
at all. Differ as they may, however, unless 
perfectly indifferent, there are some whose 
beauty is so apart and distinct, that it must 
be acknowledged. Yet not necessarily loved. </p>

<p>If Martial admitted her beauty in time, 
would he even then love her ? He might 
admire and turn away. </p>

<p>Still gazing at her face, Felise thought she 
discovered something more there than loveli- 
ness; she thought she saw the power to call 
forth passion in another's breast. In that 
thought she dreamed in the midst of the 
day. </p>

<p>Of all time all that have lived have been 
covetous of possessing this power; see the 
legends which have been invented of charms, 
which concealed about the person rendered 
the wearer attractive; read the sorceries of 

</p>

 </p>

<p>ancient Rome; go across then to Scandi- 
navia, and listen to the bugle whose sound 
drew the maidens to the player. Man and 
woman alike, so do not condemn woman. </p>

<p>Some failings are far more desirable than 
that which passes for virtue. This is one of 
them. Felise did desire to be loved; she 
acknowledged it to herself; she dreamed in 
the thought that perhaps she possessed the 
power — if only he could see her face fre- 
quently. If! </p>

<p>Rising from the water's side she went on 
to the boathouse, and shut herself in the 
compartment prepared for dressing. </p>

<p>The idle trout were floating but just be- 
neath the surface of the illumined pool. 
Now and then one would touch the surface 
with the tip of his lips, causing the tiniest 
ripple, which immediately returned to the 
level. He seemed as if he had a partial 
mind to the midges which moved to and fro; 
nothing could be easier for him than to take 
them. In fact, he had not the least appetite; 

</p>



<p>he was merely idling. Had a skilled angler 
cast the line so gently as not to cause the 
least splash, had the most tempting fly been 
dropped on his very mouth, the trout would 
have regarded it without interest. </p>

<p>Some greenfinches came down to drink at 
the shallow edge, where there was a strip of 
sward. After they had sipped they departed 
up the valley over the wood, laughing in their 
gossip as they went. A dove flew up into 
a beech on the same side of the pool, but did 
not ' coo;' he remained perched and ob- 
servant. Several times a thrush brought 
food for her young who were hidden in the 
ferns and tall grasses by the sward, and each 
time returned without descending to them, as 
if there was a stoat lying in wait. </p>

<p>Among the grey-green bulrushes, farther 
up the pool where it contracted, the moorhen 
was now feeding again complacently, and two 
black little ones swam beside her. Under 
the shadow of willows by the shore, there the 
golden lamps of the yellow iris shone, Sun- </p>

<p>VOL. I. 7 

</p>

 </p>

<p>light lit up the broad clear surface — so clear 
that the rays penetrated nearly to the bottom 
even in the deeper parts. Continually flow- 
ing, the roar of the cataract over the hatches 
rose like the excited sound of a multitude 
crying for the show to begin. A pleasant, 
soothing rush of splashing water; the very 
sound diminished the summer heat. 






</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XI</h2> 



|ELISE opened the door of the 
bathing- room, and stepped out 
upon the platform before it. She 
stood in the shadow of the beeches behind; 
all the rest of the pool was in bright light. 
Her bathing-tunic was blue, bordered with 
white, and fringed with gold — such a tunic as 
might have been worn by a Grecian maiden. 
It was loose about her shoulders, they were 
nearly bare; her arms quite so. In the 
shade the whiteness and purity of her skin 
was wonderfully beautiful. It gleamed in 
the cool shade, more so than the yellow iris 
flowers, though they had the advantage of 
bright colour. </p>

<p>7—2 

</p>

<p>loo THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>The beauty of a perfect skin is so great, to 
gaze at it is happiness. The world holds no 
enjoyment like the view of beauty. </p>

<p>Her white feet were at the very edge of 
the dull boards, so that her reflection was 
complete in the water had anyone been look- 
ing from the opposite shore. She put up 
her hands to settle the strings of pearls in 
her hair, to make certain that they would not 
come loose. It was Felise's fancy to wear 
her pearls — her only jewellery and dowry — 
when she bathed out of doors in the sun- 
shine. She decked herself for the bath — 
the bath not only in water, but in the air and 
light — as if she had been going to a temple 
in the ancient times. </p>

<p>With her hands employed at the back of 
her head and arms raised, the contour of her 
form was accentuated. The deep broad 
chest, the bust, the hips, filled out. The 
action of lifting the arms in this manner 
opens the ribs, decreases the waist, slightly 
curves the back, and extends and develops 




</p>

 loi </p>

<p>every line. A sculptor should have chosen 
her in such an attitude. </p>

<p>In a moment, lifting her hands and joining 
them high above her head, she dived — the 
pearls glistened as she passed out of the 
shadow into the sunlight, and the water hid 
her completely. </p>

<p>The dove flew, startled from his branch in 
the beech; a swallow that had been coming 
to drink, as he flew, mounted again into the 
air. </p>

<p>She rose at some distance from the diving- 
platform, and immediately struck out slowly, 
swimming on her chest. Her chin was well 
out of water, and sometimes her neck; her 
chest held so large a volume of air that she 
was as buoyant as a water-bird. It needed 
no effort to keep afloat; all her strength was 
at liberty to be used in propulsion. Swim- 
ming towards the hatch, presently she turned 
and came back to the platform, then out 
again into the centre of the pool, where she 
floated, dived under, and floated again. 

</p>

<p>10 2 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>Gathering enegry from practice and the 
touch of the water, she now swam on her 
side, following the margin of the pool all 
round, so as to have a larger course. Twice 
she went round without a pause — swimming 
her swiftest, equal, in a direct line, to several 
hundred yards. Still joying in the sunlight 
and the water, she continued again for the 
third circle. Her passage was even swifter, 
her vigour grew with the labour. </p>

<p>The water drew back the tunic from her 
right shoulder, which shone almost at the 
surface; her white right arm swept back- 
wards, grasping the wave; her left arm was 
concealed, being under her, and deeper. It 
is the fastest, the easiest, and the most grace- 
ful mode of swimming. In the moment 
when her rounded right arm was sweeping 
backwards, clearly visible in the limpid water 
— just as the stroke was nearly completed — 
the sculptor might again have obtained an 
inspiration. For at that moment there was 
repose in action, the exertion of the stroke 

</p>



<p>finishing, the form gliding easily, the left 
cheek resting as if reposing on the surface. </p>

<p>At the completion of the third round, 
Felise swam to the shallow grassy shore, 
where Shaw was now waiting for her. 

' Oh, how you do panck !* (pant), said 
Shaw, laughing, as Felise walked up out of 
the water on to the turf, and sat down at the 
edge of the shadow of the beech. Her 
breast was heaving with the labour, her deep 
grey eyes shone as if enlarged; there was a 
slight increase of colour in her face. She 
was not in the least exhausted; she was ex- 
hilarated to the utmost. Shaw chatted beside 
her; Felise neither heard nor heeded, she 
was full of the influence of the air and light 
and limpid fountain. </p>

<p>There was something almost sacred to her 
in the limpid water, in the sweet air, and the 
light of day. The flower in the grass was 
not only colour, it was alive. The water 
was not merely a smooth surface, the air not 
merely an invisible current, the light not 

</p>

 </p>

<p>merely illumination. As if they had been 
living powers, so they influenced her. A 
feeling entered her from them : the light, the 
air, the water, the soft sward on which her 
hand rested, life came to her from them. </p>

<p>With them she felt her own life, she knew 
her own fulness of existence. Like this the 
maidens of ancient Greece sang to the 
stream when they filled their urns. Even 
Socrates the wisest sat pondering in reverence 
by the stream. Felise was full of the deli- 
cious influence of the great powers of nature. 
This susceptibility rendered her love so rich 
and deep. </p>

<p>She sat leaning on her left hand, her knees 
lying sideways, and her right hand on her 
ankle; the upper part of her form in shadow? 
her limbs in the brilliant light. The beams 
fell on her white rounded knees; the right 
knee being uppermost was entirely in light, 
but it cast a partial shadow on the left one. </p>

<p>Twins in exquisite whiteness and shape 
they reposed together, the under one a little 

</p>



<p>in advance. The knee-cap (which in woman 
is small), slipping naturally aside, left a space 
on the summit of each knee smooth and 
almost level, perhaps in the least degree 
concave. Upon these lovely surfaces the 
light rested lovingly; in the wide earth there 
was no spot the sun loved so well. </p>

<p>The rounded supple knee is where the 
form hinges; there all is poised. They are 
the centres from which beauty rises. With 
the knee all grace begins; they bend, and at 
the same moment the neck bows, and the 
forehead droops. Resting on them firmly 
the shape rises, the neck is straightened, and 
the brow thrown back. All is poised on 
the knee. </p>

<p>Because of its varying mood of grace 
the knee can with difficulty be seized in 
sculpture or painting. The least flexure 
alters the contour. Now from head to foot 
it is the flesh that is beautiful, that which 
covers and conceals the bones and muscles 
under its texture. Such is the rule, 

</p>

<p>io6 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>to express beauty you must delineate the 
adipose tissue; the knee is the excep- 
tion. </p>

<p>Here the bone — the knee-cap — is but thinly 
covered, and there is cartilage and sinew; not 
much more than the skin hides them. Here 
is the only place where the bone and sinew 
can approach the surface — can be recognised 
— and yet not interfere with the sense of 
loveliness. Why so ? </p>

<p>Because at this centre motion commences; 
the idea of motion is inseparable from it, motion 
in graceful lines. In walking it is the knee 
that gives the step, in the dance, stooping 
to gather flowers, bending to prayer; from 
the knee passion springs to the arms of her 
lover. We have seen these movements and 
admired them, and the eye transfers their 
grace to the knee. </p>

<p>But it is also of itself shaped. There alone 
the bone and sinew assume an exquisite form. 
I cannot tell you why the human heart yearns 
towards that which is rounded, smooth. 

</p>



<p>shapely; it is an instinct in the depth of our 
nature. </p>

<p>The knee is so very human, so nearly 
sorrowful in its humanity; sorrow seeks its 
knees, sadness bends on them, love desiring 
in secret does so on its knees. They have 
been bent in many moods in so many lands 
so many many centuries past Human life 
is centred in the knee. In the knee we 
recognise all that the heart has experienced. </p>

<p>Beautiful knees, the poise and centre of the 
form ! Were I rich, how gladly I would 
give a thousand pounds for a true picture of 
the knee ! and if the coloured shadow on 
convas were worth so much, how many times 
multiplied the value of the original reality ! </p>

<p>However indifferent the person may be — 
the individual — to see the knee is to love it 
for itself. </p>

<p>The shadow of the upper one partially 
encroached on the lower; round about the 
under knee, too, the short grass rose. Im- 
mediately behind, the least way higher than 

</p>

<p>io8 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>the upper knee, the bullion fringe of the 
tunic drooped across the white skin. Her 
left hand rested among the daisies; her feet 
reached nearly to some golden lotus flowers. </p>

<p>The left, or under foot, was much hidden 
by the grass; the grass touched warm, having 
been hours in the sunshine. The upper foot 
was visible, and two straight strokes — two 
parallel dimples crossed the large toe (the 
thumb of the foot) at the second joint. </p>

<p>She held her ankle lightly with her right 
hand, so that her right arm descended beside 
her body. Bare from the shoulder in its 
luxurious fulness, it reposed against her. 
The slight pressure of its own weight 
enlarged it midway between the shoulder 
and the elbow. But the left arm being 
straightened appeared, on the contrary, 
largest at the shoulder. </p>

<p>That shoulder — the left — raised a little 
higher than the other, on account of her 
position, was partly bare, the tunic having 
slipped somewhat. Unconsciously she pressed 

</p>



<p>her cheek against it, feeling and caressing it. 
Her shoulder lifted itself a little to meet the 
embrace of her cheek, and the tunic slipped 
still more, giving it and that side of her 
bust freedom to the air. She liked to feel 
herself; the soft skin of the shoulder met the 
softer cheek; her lips touched the place 
where arm and shoulder are about to mingle. </p>

<p>Shaw thought Felise had finished bathing, 
and kneeling behind her, undid her hair, 
which fell and reached the grass. It was 
somewhat wavy, very thick and long, and 
delicate in texture. As it descended it con- 
cealed the beautiful shoulders like a mantle. 
She took her strings of pearls from Shaw, 
and held them in her right hand; she valued 
them greatly, and scarcely cared to let even 
Shaw carry them. </p>

<p>A red butterfly came by and hovered 
about her knee, inclined to alight, but per- 
ceiving that it glistened with the water, flew 
onwards over the pool. </p>

<p>Felise moved her feet among the grass. 

</p>

<p>no THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>she liked to feel it; she extended her foot to 
the golden lotus flowers. But the moment 
of luxurious enjoyment of the sunlight and 
the air, the liberty of the tunic, was over; 
her active nature reasserted itself; she rose 
and walked towards the bathing apartment 
to dress. 

* There's a rabbit in the ferns,* said Shaw, 
following her; ' I heard him rustle twice. 
Wonder why you won't talk to-day, now. If 
I was to run round the water like you swim 
round, I should die of pancking [panting], I 
should.* </p>

<p>She looked as if such exertion would over- 
come her : short, plump, and merry. </p>

<p>Felise took no heed of Shaw's chatter; 
she was thinking how to accomplish her 
resolution. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XII</h2> 

</p>

<p>I FEW days after Barnard met Felise 
on Ashpen, he was walking by the 
side of the little estuary where the 
trout-stream entered the sea. It was a lonely 
spot, but he looked round to see that no one 
was near. Then he took from his pocket 
Felise's handkerchief, and the piece of mane 
which she had plaited; and rolling them care- 
fully up round a heavy pebble, he stepped to 
the edge of the low cliff and hurled the 
pebble as far as he could into the sea. </p>

<p>Next, he walked home rapidly, mounted 
Ruy, and rode up to the solitary beech-tree 
on the downs, under which Felise had stood. 
The letter ' M ' showed much more plainly 

</p>

 </p>

<p>now the sap had dried — it appeared very 
distinct. Barnard got off his horse, and 
taking out his knife cut a circle round the 
entire letter, which he then tore off, leaving 
nothing but a circular mark on the tree. 
The strip of bark he broke in pieces, and 
flung in various directions; then re-mounted, 
and rode home. Thus he got rid of every 
trace of that morning's interview. </p>

<p>He would not be fooled any more; or, 
rather, he would not fool himself a second 
time. Why should he persuade himself into 
a state of feeling that was not natural to 
him ? Felise was nothing to him. </p>

<p>To understand his proceedings it is neces- 
sary to very briefly recount a part of his 
history. Like every young man when he 
surmounted his teens, he thought it was 
proper for him to fall in love. There was a 
young lady in Maasbury town, the daughter 
and heiress of Mr. Wood, a wealthy wine 
merchant, from whom the Barnards had had 
their wine for some years. Rosa was a few 

</p>



<p>months younger than himself, bright and 
talkative; in appearance of the middle 
height She had a low forehead with much 
dark hair about it — the forehead was not 
really low, but the hair came down it. </p>

<p>Her eyes were brown, the eyebrows well 
arched, the lips a little thin, but red and 
laughing. Perhaps her smile was the most 
effective of her attractions, but she had a 
very fair figure, and much of the glow of 
youth in her cheek. Rose was indeed de- 
cidedly good-looking, not so much from any 
especial quality as the aggregate of her 
appearance. She was clever, and fond of 
reading, and she was the heiress to the mer- 
chant's money. No one could have found 
fault with Barnard's choice; the lady was 
eligible in every way. </p>

<p>Accordingly he began to pay his addresses 
to her in a manner which soon distanced 
every competitor. In the first place he was 
handsome, and in rather an unusual style; 
full of life and animated. He was the pre- </p>

<p>VOL. I. 8 

</p>

 </p>

<p>sent representative of a good family. He 
rode a splendid horse. It was very nice to 
go over to the Manor House Farm on a 
picnic. Then there was no other gentleman 
in the neighbourhood at all his equal; they 
were boors in comparison, and a woman 
naturally likes to carry off the leading indi- 
vidual. </p>

<p>Barnard had received an exceptionally 
good education, and, what is much more im- 
portant, he had moved in good society as a 
lad when manners are formed. Some rich 
and high-placed friends had taken hinl with 
them into houses in London not easy to 
enter. They had designed him to occupy a 
forward place, and even talked of Parlia- 
ment. But a quarrel accidentally arose be- 
tween them and Barnard's parents, and the 
boy had to suffer because his elders dis- 
agreed. Barnard returned to the country 
and the somewhat solitary life of a farm- 
house. </p>

<p>By nature his ideas were elevated and 

</p>



<p>aspiring; he read much, and of the most 
varied authors, and some of the spirit of the 
great dramatists and poets entered into his 
mind. Youth is always romantic; Martial's 
romance was heightened by a quick imagina- 
tion which coloured everything. As he 
moved about the hills, and by the sea, his 
ideas went with him, and the scene was filled 
with figures and thoughts. </p>

<p>When he fell in love with Rosa — or be- 
lieved that he had done so — he transferred 
these romantic imaginings to her. He sur- 
rounded her with a cloud (as the immortal 
goddesses were enveloped), and hid the real 
woman from himself by the fervour of his 
fancy. Though he did not write verses, he 
looked upon her, and acted towards her, as a 
poet might. There was a delicate refinement 
in all the attentions he paid her which could 
only proceed from a sensitive and highly- 
wrought nature. </p>

<p>Rosa really loved him, but she was not in 
the least what he thought; he had conferred </p>

<p>8—2 

</p>

<p>ii6 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>upon her attributes which she was incapable 
even of understanding. She would have made 
a good wife under ordinary circumstances, 
but she was commonplace. She loved with- 
out passion; she had neither the fire of love 
nor of ambition. There really was no fault 
to be found with her; but she was not what 
Martial fancied she was. </p>

<p>This lad's courtship continued for some 
two years, during which he exhausted every 
extravagance a poetical nature is capable of. 
Every exalted sentiment in his favourite 
poets and dramatists he associated with 
Rosa. </p>

<p>Towards the end of the two years, how- 
ever, a change began to take place. We all 
know how slowly the tide rises or ebbs, and 
so in life. Alterations commence and pro- 
ceed a considerable length before they are 
recognised. A certain feeling of weariness 
overcame him. He went to see her as fre- 
quently as ever, yet he found himself less 
eager to start, and felt a sense of freedom 

</p>



<p>when the evening was over and he rode 
home. </p>

<p>He received an invitation to visit a friend 
for a fortnight, and upon his return it seemed 
to him that Rosa had completely changed. 
Where was the grace, the beauty, the glow 
that had fascinated him two years ago ? 
Where was that indefinable attraction he had 
experienced so powerfully ? He could look at 
her now without emotion. </p>

<p>The truth was the dream was fading, and 
he was beginning to see the woman as she 
was, and not as he had painted her to him- 
self. He had poured out all his heart to her 
— now he had nothing further to give, he saw 
her as she really existed. </p>

<p>He had met her too soon. If he had not 
known her till he was forty, possibly he 
might have married her as a matter of judg- 
ment. </p>

<p>Once a lover sees his mistress as com- 
monplace, the spell is over. Rosa wearied 
him, and he soon found his attendance upon 



^ ^ ^ ■• J 

</p>

<p>ii8 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>her a burden. Yet he was bound by his 
own previous conduct to continue it. </p>

<p>An incident now occurred which should 
have been welcome to him, as giving him his 
freedom, but which he considered to bind 
him still more strongly. His cousins, who 
resided at the Manor House free of ex- 
pense, required a sum of money to convert a 
lease into a freehold. Their fortune consisted 
of the lease of several well-situated houses in 
a fashionable watering-place, which they sub- 
let to great advantage. The houses had not 
many years now to run, and they were be- 
moaning themselves at the prospect of losing 
their income, when an unexpected oppor- 
tunity occurred to purchase the freehold at a 
moderate price. </p>

<p>They begged Barnard to let them have 
the money in payment of an old debt due 
from his father to their father. One brother 
had borrowed from the other, and had never 
been able to repay the principal without en- 
dangering his position. True, he had re- 







</p>



<p>paid sums of;i^5o and;^ioo on several 
occasions; true, the children (these ladies), 
since their father's death, had resided at the 
Manor House. </p>

<p>Their education had been paid for, and 
since they came to womanhood an annual 
sum equal to the interest on the loan had 
been handed over to them. The actual loan 
in these varied ways had been returned 
over and over again, yet it had never been 
formally repaid. </p>

<p>Martial was too young and too generous 
to plead these things, and the extremely 
exhausted state of his own finances. He 
promised to let them have the money, but he 
had to borrow it, and the knowledge of this 
came to Mr. Wood's ears. </p>

<p>Mr. Wood had never supposed Barnard to 
be wealthy; still, when a man lives in a 
fine house — almost a mansion — keeps a good 
table, and rides a good horse, even a keen 
merchant can sometimes scarcely believe he 
is deep in the abyss of poverty. But when 

</p>

<p>I20 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>he found that Barnard had been borrowing 
money he made inquiries, and discovered 
that the accepted suitor of his daughter and 
heiress was really penniless. </p>

<p>Mr. Godwin, the agent or steward of the 
estate of which the Manor House Farm was 
a part, had even been heard to say that 
Barnard only remained a tenant upon suf- 
ferance, for his rent was in arrear. </p>

<p>As a matter of course, Mr. Wood upon 
this informed his daughter and Barnard one 
evening that their engagement must be 
broken off for the present. If Barnard suc- 
ceeded some day in regaining a position, he 
would be welcome indeed. If not, as a 
gentleman, he must see that Rosa could not 
be his. Not to prejudice Rosa's chances, 
Barnard must in future be more sparing in 
his visits. </p>

<p>From different causes the lovers received 
this intelligence calmly enough. Rosa shed 
a few tears, and then reflected that after all 
Martial could still call once a week. In time 

</p>

 121 

</p>

<p>the seasons would alter; there would be good 
crops, and Martial would have money. Be- 
sides, they were both very young, and by- 
and-by, when Mr. Wood saw how constant 
she was to Martial, he would relent; she 
was sure he would. Her estimate of the 
circumstances was probably accurate. She 
did not weep any more, but went about her 
usual employment cheerfully. </p>

<p>Martial worked himself into a fever of 
excitement (not that he let her see his irri- 
tation), but his annoyance was with himself, 
because he did not feel any indignation. 
He knew, if he would admit the truth to 
himself, that it was a welcome release from 
an irksome position. But he ought to have 
been burning with indignation — he ought to 
have called upon all the gods, and at least 
persuaded Rosa to elope with him. </p>

<p>Instead of which, a sense of complacency 
stole over him. He could walk and ride and 
read without the inward necessity of asso- 
ciating every idea with Rosa. 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>But just in proportion as he felt this sense 
of complacency, so he resolved to force 
himself to remain faithful to his first choice, 
to confirm all his vows, and ultimately to 
carry them into effect. He wrote in this 
vein to Rosa, promised eternal constancy, 
and when he saw her, renewed his promises; 
yet even in the act of speaking he could not 
help noticing that her eyes showed no trace 
of midnight tears, nor did her manner seem 
the least degree less cheerful. </p>

<p>Still, no matter what he thought, he must 
conscientiously carry out his plighted word; 
it was his duty; the duty of every lover. 
He ought to do it; the fitness of things 
demanded it. To be constant under all cir- 
cumstances was the role of his position. 
Romance ruled him as powerfully as ever, 
although his illusions had ceased. Each 
week his one call became more and more a 
labour; each week he resolved more firmly 
to fulfil the original understanding to the 
letter. 

</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2> </p>

<p>JBOUT three months after this ex- 
planation and the repudiation of 
the engagement, it happened one 
day that Martial was following the harriers 
on the hills, when, to his surprise, he ob- 
served a lady running on foot with such 
speed that she kept pace with the horsemen. 
He could not help noticing her grace, and 
admiring the swiftness with which she ran. 
He saw her quite close several times during 
the day. </p>

<p>As he rode homewards, he stopped to 
speak with a friend, who asked him to take 
some refreshment (a collation had been on 
the table all day for passing sportsmen), and 

</p>

 </p>

<p>it so happened that a lady whom Felise had 
met in the field had brought her there for the 
same purpose. By accident Martial sat op- 
posite Felise, and her face from that hour 
was painted irremovably in the chamber of 
his mind. </p>

<p>He did not see her again in the field, for 
Felise fancied that she had attracted undue 
attention. Bold as she was in her own love's 
cause, she was sensitive to observation at 
other times, and she did not run again after 
the harriers. </p>

<p>But in the winter it happened that a little 
matter of business arose between Barnard 
and Mr. Goring about a watercourse in which 
both were interested, and in order to settle 
it amicably a personal interview was desir- 
able. Barnard rode over, and for the second 
time met Felise. On this occasion the inter- 
view was even shorter and more formal, but 
it was long enough to confirm Martial's first 
impression. </p>

<p>Week after week, as he sat by Rosa, he 

</p>



<p>saw the face of Felise. He did not feel the 
least emotion of love for Felise, but he saw 
her face before him. Day by day his weari- 
ness increased, till his position towards Rosa 
became intolerable. He could not endure 
her; it was a misery to him to spend even 
the short time now permitted in her pre- 
sence. It was not hatred, it was worse — it 
was utter ennui and dislike. The more this 
grew upon him, so much the more, according 
to his code, he was bound to conscientiously 
attend her. </p>

<p>No fresh -sprung passion for Felise mingled 
with this revulsion. All his ideas of Felise 
were simply admiration, the admiration given 
to a picture. The singular loveliness of her 
features and the grace of her form took a 
deep hold of his artistic nature, but his heart 
did not throb. Her influence was negative. 
She had not inspired him with passion, but 
she had thrown up the object of his previous 
admiration into unpleasant relief. </p>

<p>He now saw only too plainly that Rosa 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>was only pretty; pretty, because she was 
young. He did not like a low forehead 
overhung by a quantity of dark hair. Her 
figure was not full; her shape looked flat to 
him now; her walk was clumsy; and he 
observed that she brought down the toe of 
her boot after the heel, making a second 
stump distinctly. These two clumping noises 
irritated him. Somehow her dresses never 
suited her, though they were expensive; her 
conversation was insufferably insipid. In 
fact, he was for ever unconsciously com- 
paring her with Felise, and continually find- 
ing out additional defects. </p>

<p>All he wanted was to be free; he did not 
want Felise, but he wished to be free of 
Rosa. </p>

<p>He looked back upon his extravagances 
with such disgust as to feel ready to kill 
himself for having committed them. The 
quotations, for instance, from his favourite 
poems, which he had applied to Rosa — he 
put the very books away out of sight, that 

</p>



<p>they might not remind him. Unless it was 
necessary, he carefully avoided entering the 
town, simply because she lived there; yet he 
called every week, and paid her the same 
attentions. </p>

<p>The disgust with which he looked back 
upon his own former sentiments was much 
stronger than the dislike he felt towards 
Rosa herself. Though he now saw her 
defects so distinctly, he could not help 
owning that she had committed no fault.- 
His anger was with himself. </p>

<p>Despite his efforts to forget, and despite 
the putting away of his books, every now 
and then he caught himself applying the old 
quotations to Felise, to whom they fitted 
exactly. </p>

<p>This rendered him still more irritable; 
nothing on earth should ever induce him to 
commit such fooleries again. He did not 
love Felise, and he did not want to love her. 
Had he not read about love he should never 
have loved at all, nor understood what it 

</p>

 </p>

<p>meant. Such reading ought to be destroyed, 
placing, as it did, stilted and unreal ideas 
into young people's heads. </p>

<p>A man did not need anything of the kind; 
a man ought to be quite independent of such 
fancies; a man should be quite free and 
independent, and walk about, and whistle, 
and think of nothing. Fellows who were 
always paying court to women became effe- 
minate and contemptible. A woman's ser- 
vitor, such as he had been — and still was 
— was despicable. He despised himself 
thoroughly. He easily found examples in 
history to support his new views, such as 
that of Alexander the Great, who conquered 
the world, and was reported indifferent to 
women. But Mark Antony quitted the 
stage at the end of a petticoat. Ignominious ! </p>

<p>At the same time, he was always thinking 
about the beautiful face of the woman he had 
seen but twice. Several times he rode to- 
wards Mr. Goring's house, thinking that he 
might see her in the garden as he passed. 

</p>



<p>but on approaching turned back, accusing 
himself of disloyalty to Rosa. After these 
rides he had fits of contempt, despising him- 
self for even thinking of a woman. </p>

<p>Still, he reasoned that it was quite possible 
to admire beauty, and yet to be perfectly 
heart-whole, and to avoid the absurdities of 
which he had been guilty. Artists employed 
the most handsome models they could find, 
but did not fall in love with them. His 
admiration of Felise was purely artistic. 
Any other woman — if as beautiful — would 
have suited him as well to look at. </p>

<p>Currents of thought or emotion go on for 
a long time in the mind before a step is 
taken. The step came at last; Barnard 
began to omit his weekly call upon Rosa. 
First, he missed a week, then a fortnight, 
then three weeks. The commonplace woman 
for a time was perfectly satisfied with his 
explanations — the pressure of work in the 
spring season, and so on. It was quite right 
he should attend to the farm, since, if not, he </p>

<p>VOL. I. Q 

</p>

<p>I30 THE DEWY MORN, </p>

<p>could not marry her. The intervals between 
his visits were tedious, still they passed. </p>

<p>But when Barnard did not call for an 
entire month, an uneasy feeling came over 
her. She began to think about him in a 
different strain, and soon recollected number- 
less trifling circumstances which increased 
her anxiety. Rosa had never encouraged 
his extravagances, but she missed them. 
Certainly Barnard was not so attentive as he 
had been. </p>

<p>At last she determined to go over and see 
him, and did so. He accompanied her home, 
and, so far as outward manner was concerned, 
she found him unchanged. Her subtler 
instincts being aroused, she was all the same 
confirmed in her dread that Barnard was 
beginning not to care for her. As he did 
not call again, nor write, she was sure that 
he had ceased to love her. </p>

<p>This commonplace woman, accordingly, 
after weeping silently out of sight at night 
for a little while, composed herself, and ad- 

</p>



<p>dressed a short letter to her former lover. 
In a few simple sentences she told him that 
she saw plainly enough he was tired of her; 
and that being so, she wished him to con- 
sider himself perfectly free. She loved him 
with her whole heart, and she should always 
be his. That was all; there was no passion 
in the letter, but it was strictly true — she 
would always be his, </p>

<p>Barnard was deeply hurt — not at her con- 
duct — but at his own. He felt a most pitiful 
coward to have won a woman's heart and 
then to have left her like this. He was 
utterly ashamed of himself — this bitterness 
was the punishment of his romantic follies. 
Without the least trace of conceit on his part, 
he was aware that Rosa really loved him. 
Wherever he went, or whatever he did, here 
was a woman always thinking of him, and 
always adhering to him. Easy to absent 
himself from her presence, impossible to turn 
her mental gaze away. </p>

<p>The question may be asked, whether it </p>

<p>9—2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>was not better for him to have broken with 
her, than to have remained at her side always 
wishing to be away. </p>

<p>If anyone is disposed to greatly blame 
Barnard, two things must be borne in mind : 
firstly, that there had been no viciousness in 
his conduct; secondly, his youth. Even 
now he was but five-and-twenty. Not for 
an instant had he foreseen the result of his 
folly, and he now sincerely regretted it. 
Still, there the result was. </p>

<p>The cruelty to Rosa was very great. No 
fault, no frivolity, an earnest quiet girl, and 
suddenly cast down from the position of 
sedate happiness she reasonably expected. 
The circumstances were very hard upon her. 
Suppose, for a moment, we exonerate Mar- 
tial from all blame, how cruel it was to Rosa 
that Felise should possess so beautiful a 
face ! </p>

<p>The mere fact of Felise's existence was a 
cruelty to her. The existence of one woman 
is incompatible with the happiness of another. 

</p>



<p>But for Felise's existence Barnard was in no 
degree responsible; fate had prepared this 
thing for Rosa to * thole/ that fine old 
English word which conveys the sense of 
enduring at the hands of something irresist- 
ible. </p>

<p>Martial saw the cruelty of it all to her, and 
that pity made him feel tenderer towards her 
than he had done for a long, long time. 
Forgetting her commonplaceness and his 
weariness, he thought of her in a sorrowful, 
far-off way, which, if Rosa could have known 
and understood, would have burnt her heart 
like molten iron. But for all his tenderness 
he did not go to her. </p>

<p>The bitterness of his extravagances re- 
coiled on his own head. Memory constantly 
brought back to him some sentiment he had 
uttered, or fancied he experienced, and which 
now mocked at him. </p>

<p>There is nothing more terrible while it 
lasts than for a man to despise himself. </p>

<p>After several days spent in this way. Mar- 

</p>

<p>154 THE DEWY MORS. 

</p>

<p>tial said to himself that he must do one of 
two things — either he must go back to Rosa 
and honourably cany out his promise, no 
matter at what cost to himself, or he must 
sell off the stock and emigrate. In the back- 
woods of America he could hide himself, and 
perhaps in time forget </p>

<p>Though he was the tenant of fifteen hun- 
dred acres, his finances were in such a 
critical condition that to sell off and quit 
would be perhaps the wisest thing to do 
while yet fifty pounds remained to his credit. 
He should not see any beautiful faces in the 
backwoods. His rifle would console him; 
he took it down and looked at it — it was 
one of Lancaster's small oval bores. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIV</h2> </p>

<p>SWAYED first one way and then the 
other, Barnard rose one morning 
extremely early, bridled Ruy, and 
started for the hills, resolved to ride to and 
fro till he had made up his mind, and then 
to abide by the decision he came to. </p>

<p>Destiny arranged that that very morning 
Felise, with her heart full of love for him, 
went up on the hill to see the sun rise. </p>

<p>Now, when Barnard at last saw her, he 
naturally rode in that direction. As he ap- 
proached he recollected the unfortunate cir- 
cumstances in which he was placed, and half 
turned away. Something, however, caused 
him to again turn, and speak to her. Yet he 

</p>

 </p>

<p>could not look at her — he felt like a felon. 
He tried to leave her — ^his admiration of her 
beauty compelled him to stay; yet all the 
while bitterly conscious of the cruelty to 
Rosa. With an effort he was conquering 
the charm, when he met her gaze so full of 
wistful meaning, charged with passion. 
Proof as he was to love, his heart beat quick 
and heavily; he felt dizzy for the moment. </p>

<p>Recovering himself, he re-mounted his 
horse, but Felise held the bridle and plaited 
a lock of Ruy's mane. His face grew hot 
with shame and a feeling he could not under- 
stand. At last a passing horse tieighed, Ruy 
answered and moved, and Martial went 
without a word, for in fact, such was the 
conflux of his feelings, he could not speak. </p>

<p>When he had ridden a mile or two, and 
was descending towards his own house, sud- 
denly he began to ridicule himself. Why 
should he not speak to her ? Why should 
he be so sentimental about Rosa ? Why 
should he not have enjoyed the moment ? 

</p>



<p>Was he to be bound down more than other 
men ? What other man with such a face 
before him would have rudely parted without 
a word ? </p>

<p>Round he turned and galloped back after 
Felise; but, just as he was on the point of 
overtaking her, his mood again changed, and 
he rode back. </p>

<p>On finding Felise's handkerchief, once 
more her beauty became the uppermost 
thought; he took it with him, and placed the 
lock of plaited mane in his pocket — not in 
his pocket-book, which contained entries of 
the dates — the epochs of his courtship of 
Rosa, the first kiss, the whispered * Yes/ </p>

<p>He kept the handkerchief for a few days. 
That passionate glance dwelt in his memory; 
every time he thought of it, his heart 
quickened its pace involuntarily. Barnard had 
had experience enough to feel that such a look 
must have a meaning. Yet it could not be, 
she could not care for him; she had hardly 
seen him, and with all his faults, Barnard 

</p>

 </p>

<p>was not so conceited as to suppose that a 
woman could fall in love with him at first 
sight. </p>

<p>Was she then a coquette ? Never. Such 
a face could not be that of a flirt. A woman 
with a face as lovely as the Madonna might, 
by stress of circumstance, if her heart was 
deeply engaged, be drawn to folly — if too 
great love be folly. </p>

<p>But she could not coquet; she could not 
feign; whatever she was, she must be true. 
What, then, could she mean ? In studying 
this problem he found himself forgetting the 
cruelty to Rosa. </p>

<p>All at once he began to abuse himself. 
What did it matter to him what she meant } 
he did not feel the least interest in her, except 
as somethinj; to look at ? These sentimental 
(lU(!Slions JK^longed to that school of love 
wh()S(* tcMU^ts he had forsworn. How ever 
could h(* hv so foolish as to occupy himself 
ai^ain with such follies ? </p>

<p>This UMultMicy must be crushed in the 

</p>



<p>beginning. Nothing should induce him to 
commit such follies, and to submit to such a 
loss of independence a second time. </p>

<p>So he walked down to the sea, hurled the 
handkerchief and the lock of Ruy*s mane into 
the waves, and afterwards cut out the letter 
* M * from the beech, getting rid of every 
material trace of his interview with Felise. </p>

<p>According to some philosophers, human 
beings should be strictly kept from the view 
of anything lovely or desirable, in order that 
they may enjoy peace of mind and devote 
their lives to duty. It is certainly a fact that 
if we once see an interesting picture we like 
to see it again; and if we can, we purchase it, 
and hang it on our walls to look at day by 
day. </p>

<p>Martial's picture being in his mind, could 
not be hurled into the sea like the handker- 
chief wrapped round a pebble. Felise's face, 
that passionate gaze, haunted him, and argued 
with him. </p>

<p>The Picture said : * You can look at me 

</p>

<p>I40 THE DEWY MORN, 

</p>

<p>without the least harm to yourself. Of 
course you are quite indifferent now, your 
heart is dead — it is an extinct volcano. Such 
ashes as remain are in no danger of igni- 
tion. At your time of life, after your expe- 
riences, you are superior to that sort of 
thing. You are able to sit by the fire with- 
out burning yourself. As a man, it is your 
right to enjoy some pleasure in the world. 
But there, no man would hesitate a moment 
— you are a coward; you are afraid your 
fresh resolutions would break down; you 
cannot trust yourself; you are still full of your 
original extravagant sentiment.* 

* It is false,' said Martial. * I can gaze at 
you without an emotion.' 

* Then do so,' said the Picture, * and prove 
yourself what you pretend to be.' 

* I defy you,' said Barnard; and accord- 
ingly, saddling Ruy, away he rode and passed 
by Mr. Goring's house, thinking to see 
Felise in the garden. He repeated this 
several times, but it so chanced that Felise 

</p>

 141 

</p>

<p>was not to be seen. Barnard observed that 
the garden in front by the road was merely 
a lawn; possibly she would be more fre- 
quently in the flower-garden at the rear, or 
fishing, or boating, at the trout-pond, of 
whose existence he was aware, having often 
followed the course of the stream. </p>

<p>For certain reasons, which will appear 
presently, Barnard had now to make his 
journeys on foot. One evening he came 
over, entered the copse (there was no keeper), 
and, remaining well hidden in the brushwood, 
succeeded in getting a distant view of Felise. </p>

<p>She was sitting by the sundial, where she 
could see the sunset. </p>

<p>Next morning Martial made another 
attempt, and as he was coming through the 
copse, very nearly stepped out right in front 
of her, as she sat on the beam of the hatch 
by the pool. </p>

<p>He crouched down behind the fringe of 
ferns. Alarmed at his presence the black- 
bird ceased to sing; the thrush dared not 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>enter the fern to feed her young, which had 
left the nest; and the dove, though he 
alighted in the tree, did not coo. </p>

<p>The Picture said : * Here is a splendid 
opportunity to study me/ Martial studied 
it. He was so near that every change of 
expression was visible. He wondered why 
she had not heard him walking in the wood, 
but soon saw that she was absorbed in 
thought. </p>

<p>To know her thought was impossible — to 
trace its varying course easy. When she 
stood upright he understood that she was 
full of resolution. Presently she knelt at the 
water's edge and brooded over her own re- 
flection. She was then dreaming, but of 
what ? </p>

<p>Next she went round to the boathouse, 
and I think if Martial had known what was 
going to happen he would have taken the 
opportunity, while her back was turned, to 
steal away through the wood. I think so. 
Some things, however, are great temptations; 

</p>



<p>and a very, very great temptation renders a 
fall worthy, and ennobles the guilty. Still 
he had no idea but that she was going to 
row on the little lake. </p>

<p>Suddenly she appeared on the platform in 
her bathing-tunic, and lifted her arms while 
she readjusted the pearls. </p>

<p>He said to himself, * If I could only carve 
that attitude in marble !* The next instant 
she dived. </p>

<p>A good swimmer himself, he understood 
and appreciated the grace and strength with 
which she swam round the pool, especially 
when on her side. But when she came out 
of the water on the sward and sat down 
within three or four yards of the fringe of 
fern behind which he was concealed, he 
became so agitated he dreaded every 
moment he should forget himself and rustle 
the bushes beside him by some exclamatory 
movement, for such slight movements are 
exclamations. </p>

<p>The dew upon her knees, wet from the 

</p>

 </p>

<p>limpid water, glistened in the sunshine. Till 
this instant he had never met anything that 
answered to the poetry — the romance — in 
his heart. Full as he was of the deepest 
admiration of beauty, till this moment he had 
never seen it. </p>

<p>It was his own idea of loveliness — the 
idea within him — which he had applied to 
Rosa, and endowed her with what she had 
not, as the sunset colours a dull wall. </p>

<p>Before those beautiful knees he could have 
bowed his forehead in the grass, in the purest 
worship of beauty. They were sacred; a 
sense of reverence possessed him. </p>

<p>A sudden accession of fresh life filled him, 
as if he had inhaled some potent life-giving 
perfume — such as the ancient enchanters 
threw into the flames. </p>

<p>He had been crouching, now he knelt — 
the slight rustle he caused was that which 
Shaw heard. His breathing became so low 
it seemed to have ceased. It was like the 
first view of the sunlit sea, never again 

</p>

<p>THE DEWY MORS. 145 

</p>

<p>experienced, never forgotten; a m<Knent of 
the most eiraltfd life. This wondrous loveli- 
ness purified and fireed his soul fn>m the 
grossness erf* material existence. </p>

<p>Such is woman^s true place, to excite thus 
the deepest, the best, the most exalted of 
man's emotions. At such a moment she is 
the visible representation of something higher 
than logical expression can be found for. To 
use the words in another sense, she is the 
tangible expression of a *trath higher than 
the truth of scientific reasoning/ </p>

<p>There never lived anyone more capable 
of appreciating beauty than Martial; he 
was almost too sensitive, because the very 
violence of his emotion prevented him from 
feeling the pleasure he might have done. It 
was a passion more than a pleasure. </p>

<p>Fortunate boy to have seen such beauty ! 
Fortunate Paris before whom the three god^ 
desses came; such a moment was worth a 
thousand years. </p>

<p>After she had gone with Shaw, Martial </p>

<p>VOL. I. 10 

</p>

 </p>

<p>remained in the fern for some time, basking 
in the memory of her. </p>

<p>The day that followed he felt exhilarated, 
as if he were drinking champagne. He had 
a secret spring of delight within; he had 
only to recall what he had seen. </p>

<p>He said to himself after a time : * I have 
seen her, and I do not love her. My follies 
are over. Her beauty has only caused an 
aesthetic admiration. She is only a picture 
to me, and I have convinced myself that I 
can look safely upon the picture.' </p>

<p>How joyful this was! (The cruelty to 
Rosa was quite forgotten.) He should never 
again do anything foolish, never more commit 
extravagances or cultivate moral sentiment. 
He was quite superior to it. Never before 
had he known such freedom; all the casuistry 
he had imbibed from books of love had dis- 
appeared. The proof of it could be observed 
in this circumstance. It was laid down in all 
of them that if you looked upon unparalleled 
beauty you must love it; but he had looked 

</p>

 147 

— he had been, and still was, in a trance of 
admiration — yet he did not love. On the 
contrary, the sight had given him liberty — 
perfect freedom of the heart. </p>

<p>He was happier than he had been for two 
years, because his self-contentment had re- 
turned. He had recovered his youth. </p>

<p>He could use every opportunity of study- 
ing the picture. But he would not speak to 
her, nor let her come to an interview with 
him. He would not be wearied with glances 
— such follies were at an end. She should 
be kept at a distance whence, unruffled by 
frivolity, he could admire her calmly as a 
work of art. 


</p>

<p>10 — 2 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h2> 



^OU will not have a rise,' said Shaw. 
''Tis too bright. Let me come 
and tickle them; the water's low.* 
She would have pulled off her shoes and 
stockings and tickled the trout under the 
stones in high delight if Felise had permitted. 
They were standing in the porch, Felise 
with her fly-rod; Shaw just touching her 
here and there to complete her toilet, as an 
artist adds little touches daintily after the 
picture is finished. Felise had lately been 
singularly particular about her dress when 
she went trout- fishing. There was some- 
thing of a set, preoccupied expression on ' 
her face. 

</p>



<p>On the contrary, Shaw's round rosy coun- 
tenance was full of change, lively, with some 
sly humour. Her blue eyes sparkled; her 
brown hair was disordered with work and 
hurry; her neck, without a collar, was soft, 
white, round — these peasant girls often have 
good necks; her figure plump, so that hooks 
and eyes were constantly bursting. She 
loved her mistress dearly, and yet almost 
feared her. Shaw's was one of those faces 
that prepossess at once, so sweet, good- 
natured, and happy. 

* Where are the flies Y said Felise; * you 
have forgotten the flies.' </p>

<p>Shaw rushed upstairs and rummaged 
about. On her return, panting, she declared 
she could not find them. 

* Go and look again !' </p>

<p>Shaw went, and again returned empty- 
handed, out of breath, and puffing. 

* You are too plump,' said Felise. * I will 
go and see.' </p>

<p>Shaw blushed at the allusion to her plump- 

</p>

<p>I50 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>ness till her white neck was rosy, but insisted 
on searching a third time. Before she got 
upstairs Felise found the fly-book in her 
pocket, so forgetful had she been. 

' Now, isn't that just like it ?' said Shaw. 
* They would say you was in love,' blushing- 
again herself. </p>

<p>Felise went across the lawn (Goring and 
his man Abner Brown, as usual, were at work 
in the garden), and across the road into the 
meadows opposite. She did not try a cast 
here, for the stream was shallow and so near 
the hamlet the boys would be certain to have 
disturbed everything. Farther down she 
crossed by a footbridge, and left the bank 
of the brook to make a short route across by 
Glads Mill. In the rickyard by the mill she 
paused a moment to look down into the mill- 
pool. </p>

<p>To construct the pool it had been neces- 
sary to excavate deeply in the chalk; the 
water was far down, and the precipitous sides 
arose like walls from the surface. At one 

</p>

<p>THE DE WY MORN. 1 5 1 </p>

<p>end the water entered in a cascade, having 
been led here by a winding water-carrier. 
If anyone fell into the pool they could not 
escape, however well they might swim; to 
climb up the chalk was impossible, but to 
prevent such an accident the edge of the 
pool was fenced. </p>

<p>Scarcely anyone ever passed without at 
least casting a glance down into the deep 
dark water, which, it was said, the sunshine 
never reached. Black and still, unruffled 
while the wind blew above, it was always 
the same, and always waiting — waiting like 
Fate. The chaunt of the old millwheel, its 
quivering boom as it rolled round heavily, 
was re-echoed in the hollow, and the rush of 
the cascade formed a hissing undertone. </p>

<p>Standing in the doorway, leaning on the 
hatch, the miller touched his forehead as she 
went on into the meads again. Some were 
already mown, and the grass turning to hay; 
in some the grass rose almost to her knee; 
then there were pastures full of buttercups. 

</p>

 </p>

<p>The hot summer sun shone on the brook, 
and, as Shaw had foreseen, she did not get 
a rise. </p>

<p>Felise cast where the stream rushed round 
a boulder; she tried at a fall — at the bend 
where a streamlet joined the brook, where 
a shallow broke up the water; but she never 
threw twice. The fly touched the surface 
and was snatched away, and she walked on 
to the next likely place. With a curl of her 
wrist the line rushed out and dropped, and 
was immediately withdrawn; so quickly was 
it done that it hardly interrupted the rapid 
pace at which she walked. By degrees she 
began to miss all the places not very attractive, 
and tried only those which she knew were 
the best, and which she could not pass while 
making any pretence at fishing. </p>

<p>Throwing at one of these, her fly caught in a 
bush on the opposite side. A boy who had 
been haymaking, but had left his rake to 
watch the fishing, eagerly rushed forward, 
and had already one foot in the water to 

</p>



<p>wade across and release it, when she jerked 
the rod sharply, snapped the gut, and went 
on. The boy remained sitting on the bank, 
with one foot in the stream, wondering at 
her. </p>

<p>Felise did not attach another fly, but cast 
the line just as it was without a bait. She 
could walk faster, having to use less care not 
to entangle the hooks. </p>

<p>From the pools, where the bright sun 
illumined the bottom, the trout rushed to 
shelter under dark roots of trees, as her form 
suddenly appeared on the bank. At the 
shallows and eddies the trout sought the 
deeper water or distant stones. Fly-fishers 
step gently, somewhat back from the bank, 
careful not to alarm the fish by sudden 
appearance or any jerking movement. 
Felise strode on swiftly, dipping her flyless 
line from time to time. She did not follow 
the curves of the brook, walking across the 
bends and so joining it again. </p>

<p>The farther she advanced the less attention 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>she paid to the brook, till she ceased even 
pretending to cast. Her pace now became 
slow, and she lingered, especially by path- 
ways; sometimes she walked up and down 
instead of straight on; sometimes she leaned 
against a tree, or sat on a rail, all the time 
glancing round — upon the watch. </p>

<p>These were MartiaVs fields. The grass 
was his by the brook, the green wheat on 
the hills close by, the copse on the slope. </p>

<p>Presently she wandered from the brook 
towards the copse, along an old and partly- 
disused rugged track between green nut-tree 
bushes that shut out all but the sun above. 
June roses flowered on the briars arching 
over the narrow lane, and honeysuckle, 
creamy-white, touched her shoulders as she 
passed. Felise, who had been so fond of 
wildflowers, did not notice the first wild 
roses, or the honeysuckle. Her heart was 
dry and heated as the sun heated the 
ground. </p>

<p>A little way apart from the disused lane 

</p>

 155 

</p>

<p>Stood an ancient barn by the wood. The 
great doors were gone, the planks as they de- 
cayed taken for firewood; the vast hollow 
within was empty but for a broken plough. 
Swallows flew in and out carelessly to their 
nests on the crossbeams. Two high Spanish 
chestnut-trees stood by the barn, and she sat 
down under one of them. </p>

<p>In the olden times of farming, when wheat 
was really golden, there had been a pros- 
perous homestead much farther down in the 
valley, and the wheat was stored in this 
great barn. The homestead was now occu- 
pied as a cottage by a labourer, the barn was 
empty, and the farm thrown together with 
others and joined to Barnard's large holding. 
Like many other deserted buildings, the barn 
was reputeci to be haunted — a sort of partial 
reputation, for if asked no one could say what 
shape its spectre took, or what crime it was 
supposed to be expiating. Standing solitary, 
its desolation alone seemed to have suggested 
the idea. The places where man's footsteps 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>and life have once been retain for years 
a memory of his presence in the guise of 
shadowy apparitions. </p>

<p>The swallows had the barn by day, the 
bats by night; the owls had deserted it — they 
like mice, and there were no mice where 
there was no grain. The spot was absolutely 
solitary; hedges and trees hid the brook 
and meads; the wood on the hill closed the 
view in front. A rabbit who had been 
feeding, and at the sound of Felise s foot- 
steps hid behind some nettles, finding her to 
stay quiet, came out again to nibble. </p>

<p>There were songs in the wood, though it 
was now the heat of the day, and the call of 
the cuckoo; Felise did not hear. When the 
heart is full it absorbs the senses to itself — 
hearing, sight, all are possessed by its 
passion. </p>

<p>This was the fourth time she had been 
here. The rod was a mere pretence; her 
object was to cross his path and meet him, as 
if by accident. But she had not been success- 

</p>

 157 

</p>

<p>ful, though she knew he must be frequently 
in the fields. She had stayed near where his 
haymakers were at work, near where others 
were weeding the arable lands; by the paths, 
and had not seen him. When weary of wait- 
ing about, it had become her custom to resort 
to the solitude of the deserted barn, and there 
rest unseen. </p>

<p>Since her resolution was formed that morn- 
ing at the trout-pool before her swim, she had 
accomplished nothing. Separated, without 
word or glance, how was it possible to 
advance her wishes ? Felise's strong and 
eager nature was already weary of this slow 
process of waiting till chance should throw 
him in her way. Sooner or later, if she per- 
severed in haunting the locality, she must 
meet him; but how long would it be first ? </p>

<p>Time seems so much longer in summer; 
the morning and the evening are far apart, 
and there is space between them for such a 
multitude of feelings, or for the same feeling 
to repeat itself so often. The long days 

</p>

<p>I5S THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>became very heavy upon her; she could not 
endure the waiting. </p>

<p>Felise started again from the ancient barn, 
and instead of returning to the brook followed 
the foot of the hill beside the wood. Some 
wheat-fields succeeded; after awhile she 
came round the hill and stepped into a 
private roadway which led direct to the 
Manor House. Erect and unfaltering she 
went straight towards Martial's residence. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2> 



^EN minutes or so after she had 
quitted the chestnuts by the barn, 
Martial himself stepped out from 
the wood, having waited till he considered 
she was far enough away not to see him. 
He followed her at a distance, taking care to 
keep some hedge, or bush, or other object 
between them. </p>

<p>The study of this work of art had led him, 
day after day, on foot down towards Mr. 
Goring's, sometimes as far as the trout-pool, 
sometimes more openly to the mill. He 
caught a glimpse of her occasionally in the 
garden or in the road, as she crossed to visit 
one or other of her cottagers. Presently he 

</p>

<p>i6o THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>discovered that she was fishing the brook, 
and as he knew every mead and every hedge 
it was not at all difficult for him to follow her, 
and yet remain himself unobserved. </p>

<p>Three times he had followed in this way, 
watching her motions with an opera-glass 
when he could not safely approach very near. 
The movement of her arms, the shape of her 
figure as she cast the fly, her pose when she 
leaned against a tree or sat down to rest 
herself — not the least inclination of her 
beautiful form escaped him. He forgot him- 
self, he lost himself utterly in the abstraction 
of his intense observation. </p>

<p>The third time (the fourth to Felise) 
becoming bolder, Martial contrived to pursue 
closer than he had hitherto done, and he was 
able to do this because she walked rapidly 
and did not look behind her. He now began 
to notice several things: first, she fished 
down stream, which is contrary to the maxims 
of the fly-fisher; next, she walked quickly 
and near the edge of the brook, while fisher- 

</p>

 i6i </p>

<p>men usually move gently and stand back 
from the bank; thirdly, she never gave a 
second cast, and she passed several pro- 
mising places without a trial — but all these, it 
was true, might arise from her inexperience 
of fly-fishing. </p>

<p>But when a boy suddenly rose out of the 
brook — startling him by so sudden an appear- 
ance — and offered him the gut and the three 
flies which he had waded over and secured. 
Martial began to think there must be some- 
thing else beside inexperience in all this. 

* Her be fishing without any fly,' said the 
boy. </p>

<p>Martial walked on cogitating, and by-and- 
by saw that Felise slackened her pace where 
two or three footpaths crossed the fields he 
occupied. There she walked up and down, 
and seemed to be waiting. She* had quite 
forgotten the fishing; she was waiting — for 
whom ? </p>

<p>He saw now that the fishing was merely a 
pretence — who would attempt fishing in </p>

<p>VOL. I. II 

</p>



<p>earnest such brilliant mornings, and the water 
low, too ? She was waiting for some one. </p>

<p>Martial did not care for her in the least; 
she was nothing to him (nor any other 
woman), a mere stranger afar off, a picture. 
His indifference to her was absolute. Yet 
such is the vanity of a man, that when it 
occurred to him she was seeking a rendez- 
vous with a lover — some one else — his heart 
thumped and his brow contracted. </p>

<p>He remembered the passionate glance she 
had once given him; he said to himself 
bitterly, ' These women are all alike, false, 
deceitful, unworthy of serious consideration^ 
How fortunate that I have done with them !' </p>

<p>Then he settled himself to wait angrily for 
the appearance of the lover, that he might 
see how base a woman could be. After a 
time Felise went away to the barn; he pur- 
sued and watched her from the wood. He 
saw the swallows descending over her head 
to the great doorway of the barn. He 
thought he saw a certain sadness in her 

</p>



<p>countenance; doubtless she was disappointed 
that the lover did not come. </p>

<p>He followed her again when she left the 
barn : he could not understand where she was 
going now, when to his astonishment she 
walked straight up to his house; the door 
opened, and she disappeared within. </p>

<p>Immediately it flashed across his mind that 
it might be himself she was endeavouring to 
meet. Read by such a light the glance she 
had given him became less deceitful; yet he 
could not think it. Why should she desire 
to meet him ? He had not sought her. 
Though he had all the vanity which is 
proper to and becomes a man, Martial was 
without the least trace of that conceit — a 
completely different thing — which leads fools 
to imagine every woman in love with them. </p>

<p>That a woman might want for some pur- 
pose of her own to deceive him with pas- 
sionate glances he could grant to himself. 
That a woman should really desire his society 
he did not think possible. </p>

<p>II — 2 



<p>But why had she gone to his house ? 
Those paths by which she had lingered were 
on his tenancy; he used them constantly. 
What was the secret meaning of these 
acts ? </p>

<p>Indifferent as he was to her, he waited 
impatiently for her to reappear. He would 
not go in while she was there; to meet and 
speak to her would be contrary to his resolu- 
tion to have nothing more to do with such 
follies. It was some time, perhaps an hour, 
before Felise came out, the eldest Miss 
Barnard with her; Miss Barnard took her 
across the fields, and was evidently showing 
her a shorter way home (as if Felise did not 
know). </p>

<p>Martial went indoors and waited for his 
cousin. He had no need to ask any questions; 
Miss Barnard commenced at once to tell him 
how Miss Goring had been trout-fishing, and 
felt fatigued from the sun, and had begged a 
glass of milk. How she had stayed and 
chatted, and how pleasant she was and singu- 

</p>

 165 

</p>

<p>larly handsome, and so interested in Dante 
and all that related to Italy. </p>

<p>Miss Barnard had lent her her album of 
scraps about Dante, and had been invited to 
visit at Beechknoll. How delightful it was 
to make the acquaintance of some one of an 
intellectual turn at last; you know they are all 
so prosaic, they talk nothing but corn and 
sheep at Maasbury — and so on, and so on. </p>

<p>Martial pondered, still more puzzled. 
Felise weary, Felise fatigued ! The woman 
he had seen keep pace with the harriers, 
who had gone up on the highest hill to see 
the sunrise, who swam round and round the 
trout-pool faster than he could have done 
himself ! Felise weary — never ! And if so, 
why to Azs house ? There was a cottage 
(the former homestead) nearer. No, there 
was something else at the bottom of this. 
Felise had evidently flattered his cousin's 
hobby. Deceit again. A work of art might 
be beautiful, yet it was nothing but false 
paint. 

</p>

<p>i66 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>He did not believe that she had called 
merely from fatigue, nor that she felt any 
interest in Dante. What, then, was her 
object — could it possibly be himself ? </p>

<p>How fortunate he was not at home, so 
that she had not the slightest opportunity of 
practising her glances upon him ! How for- 
tunate that his days of folly were over ! 
Martial congratulated himself; after all, as 
everyone must commit some foolishness, it 
was better to have got it over, as he had 
done, in early youth. The experience was so 
valuable, and would protect him. </p>

<p>A little restless after all this thinking, 
Martial did not remain at home, but ascend- 
ing the hill, watched the picture walking 
home as far as he could with his opera-glass. </p>

<p>Felise had found the eldest Miss Barnard, 
who chanced to be at home, a pleasant lady, 
dark and comfortable-looking, with a manner 
which at once put people at their ease. She 
made her unannounced visitor welcome; in 
such visits, where people do not know each 

</p>



<p>other, they run over a string of subjects to 
find something to answer for conversation. 
So Miss Barnard brought out her photo- 
graphs of Dante subjects, and presently her 
scrap-book, containing the allusions and re- 
ferences to Dante she had collected from 
current literature. </p>

<p>This middle-aged English lady, who had 
never been out of England in her life, and 
probably never would, had conceived an 
extraordinary admiration of all that was 
Dantesque. </p>

<p>I think that those who have an imaginative 
corner in their hearts are better than those 
who have not. They have a shrine — to a 
shrine we bring our aspirations; there they 
accumulate and secretly influence our lives. </p>

<p>Unscrupulous Felise looked at the Dante 
collections with kindling interest, listening the 
while for the creak of an opening door, for 
the heavier footstep which foretells a man, 
w^atching even the spaniel in the armchair, 
who would be sure to start up at the approach 



<p>of his master. Unscrupulous Felise — has love 
ever any scruples ? — pressed Miss Barnard 
to visit them at Beechknoll, and at last, having 
stayed as long as possible, left, not at all 
dissatisfied. Although she had not seen 
Martial she had opened up communication 
between the two houses. Something had 
been gained. She walked homewards in a 
happier, or at least a less restless, condition 
of mind. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVII</h2> </p>

<p>SFTER passing the old mill and the 
deep, dark pool, she turned aside 
from her homeward path, and 
crossed to a cottage by the roadside. She 
entered the garden by a wicket in the hedge; 
oak-trees spread their broad boughs above 
the thatched roof, and the border of the 
garden was gaudy with tulips, wallflowers, 
and parti-coloured daisies. Every inch of 
the enclosed ground was green with some 
vegetable or other; a minute and microscopic 
care had evidently been spent on every 
spadeful of earth the garden contained. 
One would hardly believe that so small a 
plot could produce so great a variety. 

</p>

<p>I70 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>The flagstones before the door were white 
and clean; there was no porch, and the door 
was open. Felise looked in, but there was no 
one within; she sat down, however, on a stool 
outside the door, and soon noticed something 
moving behind the screen of green which 
concealed the small extent of the garden. </p>

<p>An aged man, much bowed, supporting 
himself with a hoe and a walking-stick, 
slowly came towards her; he had been 
weeding. 

* She bean't at home, she bean't,* he said, 
alluding to his wife. * I was a-trying to do a 
little bit of weeding. And how do Abner do, 
miss ? Do he do now ? A* was a sprack 
boy. I hope he suits Mr. Goring.' </p>

<p>This hope he had expressed every time 
Felise had called these four years, during 
which his son, who was still a boy in his 
eyes, had assisted Mr. Goring in the garden. 
Felise petted the old people; Godwin, the 
estate-agent or land-steward, had been heard 
to say that she spoiled the whole village. 

</p>

 171 

* Sit down/ said Felise, offering him the 
stool; but the old man, with trembling 
eagerness, refused it, and brought himself 
out another, upon which he crouched, his 
elbows on his knees. 

* You didn't have hiuch luck a-fishing, now, 
did you ?* he said. * Bless you, miss, there 
bean't half the fish there was in the brook 
when I was a boy, and they bean*t so eager 
for the fly. As I was a-saying, I hopes 
Abner be useful now; I don't know what we 
should do if it weren't for he, for I can't do 
no work, nor my old missus neither. She 'be 
gone to get some wood to bile the kettle; 
hope as Mr. Godwin won't catch her. He be 
a hard man, Miss Goring; 'tis amazing how 
he can be so hard.' 

'You are not allowed to gather the dead 
wood now, then V 

•Not since Lady Day, miss. No; Mr. 
Godwin he came round and give them all 
notice that he should summon any of them 
as took the wood. There was something I 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>wanted to tell you, miss — didn't Abner tell 
'ee ? Maybe you haven t seen him to-day. 
But as I was saying, I hoped to get about 
and do a bit of hoeing this spring — but bless 
you, I can't do it. I got out in the road, and 
I was obliged to sit down on the flint-heap. 
'Tis hard to be old, miss, and be twisted 
with the rheumatism. Perhaps my missus 
will recollect what it was when she comes in, 
if you will wait a moment, miss.' 

* The garden looks very nice,' said Felise. 

* What a lot of trouble you take with it !' 

* Ah, that I do,' said the old man brightly. 

* I bides in un a'most all the day, and I 
thinks about un most of the night — I kind o' 
lives by he. They will never take me away 
from my garden, will they, miss ? They 
couldn't do that now, surely.' 

* I should think not, indeed.' 

* How be the barley looking, miss ? Did 
you notice as you was agoing along. There 
be generally some barley at the foot of the 
hill on Mr. Barnard's land. A' be a likely 

</p>



<p>young man, but they do say the farm bean't 
looked after as it should be. Young blood 
is young blood, and what with riding about 
and sporting — let me see, what was I going 
to say ? You knows the barley, miss; it 
have got black knots on the stalk. Bless 
you, I could use to do everything with the 
barley — I was a barleycorn man in my time. 
I could plough, that was the first thing; and 
sow the seed, miss; and hoe it, don*t you see, 
when it came up — it be a pretty plant now 
the barley, bean't it ? And I could reap it, 
and thrash it when we used to have the 
flails, and malt it — that's what a-many 
couldn't do. Many's a winter Fve spent 
a-malting — there's always a good fire. And 
I could brew the beer, and drink it too, 
afterwards — ha! ha!' </p>

<p>The barleycorn man chuckled at the 
thought of his exploits with the beer. 

* Have you got any ale for your dinner ?' 
said Felise. 

' Bless 'ee now, where should we get any 

</p>

 </p>

<p>ale from ? Abner don't bring any home, 
except what he carries in hisself.* </p>

<p>Felise opened her purse; there was a 
solitary half-crown in it. The coin had been 
there this month past, while she deliberated 
what she should do with it. Coins were 
very scarce at BeechknoU. </p>

<p>She gave the old man the silver, and told 
him to buy a pound or so of beefsteak and 
a little ale. </p>

<p>The poor old fellow was dried up for lack 
of blood in his veins; his stiffened joints 
cracked as he moved; his cheeks were a dull 
yellow like creased parchment; he was alive, 
but there was scarcely a drop of blood in 
him. Good juicy meat and the ale to which 
he had been accustomed in his youth was 
what he needed. He thanked her, but very 
quietly, with a subdued voice, very different 
to the high squeaky treble in which he had 
been . talking; and, after thanking her, 
he remained silent. His chatter came 
from his head, which was growing feeble; 

</p>



<p>his silence from his heart, which was yet 
alive. 

* What is it they say about Mr. Barnard's 
farm ?* said Felise. </p>

<p>vHe be young blood, you see, miss/ began, 
the old man, glad to be garrulous again, and 
to escape from feeling to gossip. * They do 
say he be short of money; some say he have 
had to borrow.* 

* The Barnards are not very rich, then,' 
said Felise partly to herself, happy that at 
least there was not that obstacle between 
her and Martial, to whom she could bring no 
dowry. 

* Bless 'ee, no; they bean't rich ' But </p>

<p>he was interrupted by a step on the path, 
and his ' missus ' came through the wicket in 
the hedge. * What, ain't you got no wood ?' 
said the old man. 

* HeVe took it away,' said the old lady, 
curtsying to Felise. * I be terrable glad to 
see you, miss; there be something I wants to 
tell you ' 

</p>

 

' I knowed there was something/ said the 
old man. 

' Who took your wood away ?' asked 
Felise. 

* Why, Mr. Godwin, to be sure. Do you 
call that a gentleman, now ? He took my . 
faggot away from me hisself.' 

* Not the dead sticks you had gathered i^' 

* Yes, he did; he took it away and throwed 
all the sticks in the hedge, and dared me to 
touch any more, or to step on his land or 
the Squire's land after 'em.' 

* It is very arbitrary/ said Felise. </p>

<p>The angry old lady ran on at great length, 
bitterly reproaching the steward. Mr. God- 
win had forbidden them to touch the fallen 
branches; last autumn he forbade them to 
gather the acorns, though brought to him for 
sale. As they no longer worked upon the 
estate, being too old, they must not gather 
wood or acorns, or even mushrooms. 

* He be the meanest man as ever lived,' 
said the old woman. * A' be as rich as ever 

</p>



<p>can be. Now, you knows Martha — little 
Martha; she went a-blackberrying last year, 
and Godwin he met her and took her black- 
berries from her — that he did. I suppose 
the Squire doan*t know nothing about it, but 
Godwin says 'tis the Squire's rights. But 
you come in, miss — you look here !' cried the 
old woman, rushing indoors and returning, 
before Felise could follow, with a letter in 
her hand. </p>

<p>The letter contained a formal notice to 
quit the cottage and garden. It seemed 
that the steward had several times warned 
the aged couple that they must leave; but, 
no notice being taken of his verbal orders, a 
legal instrument had at length been sent. 

* Ah, I knowed there was something,* said 
the old man. * But, bless you, they won't 
turn I out of my garden, now — will they ?' 

* That they will, you old fool !' said his 
wife, shaking him; ' you'll have to go. And 
there bean't no place for us but the workus, 
as I knows on. There bean't another cottage </p>

<p>VOL. I. 12 

</p>

 </p>

<p>in this place; they be all full up to the 
roof.' 

'Lodgings must be got for you some- 
where/ said Felise, *and Abner will help/ 

* But there bean't no lodgings/ said the 
old woman; * and my old man, he won't live 
away from his garden/ 

*They may as well bury me/ said the old 
man, dropping on his stool. *They there 
peas be fine to-year; there'll be another dish 
there soon. I thinks the apples be set well 
to-year.' 

' I will speak to papa — to Mr. Goring/ 
said Felise. * Perhaps Abner has told him. 
We will do what we can for you, be certain. </p>

<p>I cannot think Mr. Godwin really means * </p>

<p>she hesitated, for she knew the hardness of 
his character. 

* Ah, yes, he do mean it T said the old 
lady. * He be one of they as do mean 
things, and do 'em too; I hopes as his new 
horse will pitch him in the road and break 
his neckr 

</p>

 179 

' No— no/ 

* Ah, but I do though ! There's the old 
man gone pottering down to they peas. It 
be shameful, bean*t it, how we be served ! 
And after we have a-worked here all our 
lives — /^e have a-worked here nigh seventy 
years, and I have a-worked fifty-five afore I 
was took bad and couldn't do no more. It 
be shameful, miss, it be ! and thank you very 
much, but it ain't no good you trying — old 
Godwin be a flint !' </p>

<p>Felise went on homewards, eager with, the 
impetuosity of her nature to do something to 
right this wrong. I have, in part, literally 
translated the language in which the old 
couple spoke, that it might be more easily 
intelligible; they did not say * ah,' but * aw;' 
* un ' for ' him ' and ' it ' indiscriminately; they 
pronounced ' v ' for * f,' * aa ' for ' a,' and so on. </p>

<p>Mr. Godwin was a very hard man, yet he 
had but slightly strained the unwritten laws 
of country life in ordering this aged and 
helpless couple to leave their dwelling. Nine </p>

<p>12 — 2 

</p>

<p>i8o THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>out of ten cottages belong to the land- 
owner, though the immediate supervision — 
the letting — is entrusted to the tenant on 
certain conditions. There are, as a rule, 
fewer cottages than are needed, so that there 
is a struggle for them, especially on the part 
of the young who wish to be married. From 
this scarcity of cottages most young couples 
reside for years with the parents of the wife 
or husband, an arrangement never very satis- 
factory. </p>

<p>The chief condition of cottage-occupation 
is that the cottager shall work for the farmer 
upon whose farm the cottage is situate. Or 
at least, if not for him, for some one on the 
estate. The moment any difference arises, 
the labourer has not only to leave his employ- 
ment but his home. This, if he be a married 
man, generally means that he must leave the 
hamlet, because all the other cottages are full. 
The custom is the last relic of feudal times, 
for while this condition endures the labourer 
must still be a serf. 

</p>

 i8i </p>

<p>It is a custom fatal to the cottager's social 
progress, in reality injurious to the interests 
of landowner and farmer — especially to the 
landowner — and diametrically opposed to 
the interest of the country at large, because 
it forces the agricultural population to be 
nomadic instead of settled. </p>

<p>Injurious as it is to those who maintain 
it, this feudal survival will probably be fought 
for with the utmost bitterness when the 
question comes before Parliament. Once 
abolished, and people will wonder why it 
ever existed. </p>

<p>This aged and helpless couple broke the 
unwritten law, for having grown old they 
could no longer work. They occupied a 
cottage without giving any return in the 
shape of labour upon the estate. They were 
in the way — there was the workhouse for 
them — they could not want a home at their 
time of life. </p>

<p>Many a warm-hearted old farmer has such 
a couple in a cottage on his farm, and permits 

</p>

<p>i82 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>them to linger there till death. The un- 
written law is not always so harshly inter- 
preted. Still, it exists, and Godwin, a man 
of the hardest character, interpreted it 
according to his nature. </p>

<p>But the occupants of the cottage had 
broken the law in another manner; their son, 
Abner, worked for Mr. Goring, who was not 
a tenant of the Squire, and consequently 
while Abner lived in a landlord's cottage 
he took the power (horse-power if you like) 
of his muscles off the estate. Some one 
else had the benefit of his strength. </p>

<p>There was, too, the possibility of Abner 
marrying and taking his wife home to his 
parents, after the country fashion. By-and- 
by he would become the actual occupant, 
while his horse-power was expended on 
another's land. Those who occupied houses 
on the estate must work for the estate; if not, 
they must go. </p>

<p>To go, to an aged and helpless couple of 
eighty-four and seventy, meant the workhouse. 

</p>

 183 

</p>

<p>By the most cruel and iniquitous rule it is 
possible to imagine, it is not permitted to 
give assistance from the poor-rates to the 
oldest, the most helpless, and deserving of 
the population if they dare to live at home. 
They must go to the poorhouse, that 
abomination of desolation. This most brutal 
regulation would arouse the indignation of 
every educated person in the country if what 
it means could be plainly exhibited. </p>

<p>Abner's crime was unpardonable — he was 
living in a house belonging to the estate, and 
working for a man independent of the estate. 
Mr. Goring owned the land he occupied; he 
was not only independent, but a resolute 
upholder of every species of independence. 
He was paying Abner about two shillings a 
week more than he would have earned if in 
the employment of a farmer. </p>

<p>The young man was intelligent, and had a 
loyal manner — I do not know how else to 
describe it — he took an interest in what he 
was doing, and therefore to Mr. Goring he 
was worth more than an ordinary labourer. 
But this was an extremely unpopular arrange- 
ment both with farmers and labourers. The 
labourers hated to see one of their own class 
paid better than themselves; the farmers 
objected because it was an example which 
might lead other men to ask for more. </p>

<p>Felise knew little of these matters — she 
had of course heard of them, but you could 
hardly expect her to enter into such affairs. 
She was, however, well aware of Godwin's 
hardness, and his character for harsh inter- 
ference. Godwin and her uncle had had 
many and many a set-to; in fact, quarrels 
were continually occurring between them. 
Godwin had frequently threatened litigation, 
but had never resorted to it, yet with 
curious inconsistency called once a month on 
an average to invite Goring and Felise to his 
house, which was not more than half a mile 
distant. They had never accepted the 
invitation. </p>


<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2> 



■|NTERING the garden by a side- 
path, Felise heard two voices in 
^^ loud altercation, or rather one 
voice stridently asserting itself over the other, 
and she paused where she could see the 
disputants through the open window. </p>

<p>Goring in the whitest of white shirt-sleeves 
— ^just as he had left his spade — was standing 
by the mantelpiece, resting his firm chin on 
his hand, and steadfasdy regarding the 
steward. His high forehead, pardy bald, 
and flecked at the temples with grey among 
the brown of his hair, expressed calm intellect 
reposing in itself. Not the nervous, eager 
brain which seeks preferment and must thrust 

</p>



<p>Itself to the front; the intellect which reposes 
and reflects. </p>

<p>There was almost too much mind for 
action behind that noble forehead; it was the 
thinker, not the doer. The clear, steel-blue 
eyes under their thick eyebrows, the set 
mouth and the firm chin, at the same time 
indicated an immovable will; a man who 
would have his way without the least outward 
noise or ostentation. His strong frame — a 
trifle bowed, as those of men usually are who 
work with their hands for pleasure or profit 
— and great breadth were fully exposed by his 
negligent costume; his brawny throat, indeed, 
was visible. 

' If only papa would work among men 
instead of among trees, what a leader he 
would be !' thought Felise. </p>

<p>Mr. Godwin, with his hat on (not an in- 
tentional rudeness), stood by the table on 
which he struck his fist, clad in dark brown 
and wearing gaiters. He was of full average 
height, stout, and strongly built; he appeared 

</p>

<p>capable of exKgooiaL ^^i'JTrrr^ ri-^ nsi 
on the tabie "irss irmFx i:£ l piei^ of oak 
that h^^' besE e2:x35e£ iZ rbe *R^t.er to the 
action of iiie -wsaciKr. His fii:?r was neither 
ruddy, hroin^ nvc vjarJjL. bjt a mixture of 
the three; i vs rjidfr fron a fulness of 
blood; 31 ursi itittj fr::c: T*-:nd and rain : it 
was Kaci fr:m: sir. H^ face might have 
been est it iiruize, 50 reniarkable was the 
appeaisnax: rf !i5crfib>>d. </p>

<p>His fescira -w^r* r^alar, and, except that 
the deeij w^rt somewhat too full, might 
even tare Etta safd to be handsome, but 
they were asc m a set expression; his 
mouth — t&fe worst feature, being without 
cun-e— did niut smile; his brow had a lino 
constantly tiiere. This fixidity, and the ex- 
tremely weather-beaten hue of his complexion, 
seemed to announce a concentration of cha- 
racter that made most people shrink fVoni 
him. Mr. Goring was brown from the sun. 
yet beside Godwin he looked fair. </p>

<p>Godwin's voice was loud; he hurled ^'''* 

</p>



<p>words and shut his lips tight immediately; 
but his language was correct, for he was well 
educated. Possibly his exceptionally hardy 
nature had something to do with his pitiless 
character. A man with thousands in his 
pocket, but who was content with a coarse 
fare of bread and bacon, or even bread and 
cheese, was not likely to feel much senti- 
mental sympathy for weaker beings. </p>

<p>His family had all been alike; 'hard as 
crab-apples ' was the saying of the country- 
side. </p>

<p>Every tenant upon the estate spoke in 
the highest terms of Mr. Godwin to his 
neighbour. At the public dinners Mr. God- 
win was mentioned with the deepest respect. 
* A shrewd, first-rate man, Godwin; knows 
his business; a good fellow, too, at bottom.' 
Alone, in private, there was not a man who 
did not hate him; but not a man would 
have dared to admit as much even to his 
wife. </p>

<p>In Mr. Goring's calm glance there was 

</p>



<p>perhaps some little admixture of amused 
disdain. Godwin glared with his colourless 
grey eyes, the angrier because he could not 
impress the person he was attacking. 

' You cannot show a scrap of paper/ Felise 
heard Godwin saying. * Tm certain there is 
no such deed. You have no more right to 
fish than you have to give that rascally 
labourer of yours more money than anyone 
else.' 

* I believe/ said Mr. Goring, 'that the law 
permits me to pay what wages I please/ 

* It does not permit you to trespass and to 
leave gates open, so that cattle stray and do 
damage. You'll have to pay for it, Goring — 
mark my words! What right has she to 
trample down the grass and do every species 
of mischief .-^ Even if you do possess, or 
claim to possess a right to fish, it does not 
extend to her.* 

* Was it me, then ?' asked Felise suddenly, 
coming to the window. 

' You are the culprit/ laughed her uncle. 

</p>

<p>I90 THE DEWY MORN. 

* Why, you have the rod in your hand — 
you're caught/ </p>

<p>Godwin looked at her, and instinctively 
removed his hat. He growled something in 
his throat. He did not speak, but he had 
the grace to be silent. 

* You are accused of poaching, trespassing, 
and doing every species of mischief,' said 
Mr. Goring. * Come in and defend your- 
self.' </p>

<p>Felise smiled, and went round the hoiise 
to the front door; but on turning the corner 
started, became pale, flushed again, and then 
stepped quickly towards a horse Abner had 
care of. It was Ruy — Martial's horse. </p>

<p>Was /^e here, then ? </p>

<p>She stroked Ruy's neck, looked in'side the 
hall, returned, stroked him again; in her 
agitation she scarce knew what to do, or say, 
or think. 

* Is Mr. Barnard here ?* she said at last. 

* No, miss,' replied Abner. 
' But— but ' 

</p>

 191 

* Mr. Godwin came on him/ said the 
man. </p>

<p>Godwin riding Martial's favourite — how 
was this ? Felise instantly felt that there 
was something wrong, and Godwin's dark 
face appearing at that moment in the hall 
seemed sinister to her. His pale grey eyes 
— colourless like water — shone in the shadow 
of the doorway. She could not ask him any 
questions, but she did not withdraw her hand 
from Ruy's neck. The horse rubbed his 
face against her shoulder. 

* I've just bought him,' said Godwin, soften- 
ing his voice as much as he could. * Do you 
like him ?* 

' Yes.' </p>

<p>He began to gather the bridle in his hand, 
taking it from Abner. Godwin was so near 
her that her dress touched him. She felt his 
direct glance beating upon her, as the hard 
sun beats on an exposed rock. There was 
no cessation in his glance. </p>

<p>She remembered the remark of the 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>cottager that Barnard was not rich, that 
young blood spent money. Could it be that 
Martial was in difficulty ? How else came 
he to part with his horse ? Her heart 
quailed; quick sympathy confused her. She 
did not move aside that Godwin might mount, 
but stood by Ruy. </p>

<p>Godwin s colourless eyes were bent un- 
swervingly upon her face; he had the bridle 
in his hand, but he was in no haste. </p>

<p>In her agitation Felise did nothing but 
stroke Ruy, who was growing impatient for 
his manger — so affection is wasted upon 
those whose sole thought is provender. 

* I am afraid I gave too much for him,' 
said Godwin. </p>

<p>Mr. Goring smiled; the idea of Godwin 
giving too much for anything was good. </p>

<p>Felise was running over in her mind 
everything she could think of that would 
be likely to draw out the truth, yet without 
betraying her interest in Barnard. 

^ Have you had him long ?' she asked. 

</p>

 193 

* No, only a week or two/ 

* From whom did you buy him ?* — as if she 
did not know. 

* Barnard of Manor House/ 

* Did you give much ?' 

* Seventy pounds.' 

* Why did he want to sell ?* 

' Wanted the money; but I dare say 
there's something wrong with the horse. I 
shan't find it out for a month or two — 
Barnard's too sharp for me.' </p>

<p>Mr. Goring, in the porch, smiled sarcas- 
tically. If Godwin gave a man the character 
of sharpness, it went without asking that he 
was anything but shrewd at such matters as 
a horse-deal. </p>

<p>Still stroking Ruy — her dress rustling 
against Godwin, Felise for the second time; 
delayed the impatient horse; just as she had 
on the hills one morning. 

* Mr. Godwin wants to mount/ said Goring 
at last. 

* I forgot,' said Felise, and moved away; 
VOL. I. 13 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the steward, however, did not seem in any- 
great hurry. He got up leisurely enough, 
but reined Ruy with so powerful a hand that 
the horse stood quiet, and Felise touched his 
neck once more. 

'Will you come over and see us?' said 
Godwin. * My sister would be very pleased 
if you would; the meadows are dry now, and 
the path easy.' 

* I will come,' said Felise, to her uncle's 
astonishment. 

' Soon r 

■ To-morrow morning.' </p>

<p>Then she looked up at Godwin's cast- 
bronze face, and asked in the most matter-of- 
fact tone she could assume : 

' Why did Barnard sell — why did he want 
money ?' 

' Because he's a fool,' said Godwin rudely. 
She flushed — he thought it was because of 
his rudeness. 

' Beg pardon,' he said. * You will be sure 
to come to-morrow morning Y 

</p>

 195 

' I will; </p>

<p>Still Godwin lingered, Ruy fidgeted; 
Goring wished to go to his garden-work, 
but Godwin did not start. A moment 
passed without a word being spoken, when 
Felise slightly bowed and went in; Godwin 
immediately rode off without a word. 

'Are you really going to visit them.'^* 
asked Mr. Goring. 

' Yes, papa; unless you object.' 

' No, I don*t object — still, you know the 
man's character.' 

* That he is a tyrant, yes; but I am going 
to see Ruy.' 

'Ruy?' 

* Oh, I mean the horse. I heard his name 
just now. He is a beautiful horse, isn't 
he?' 

</p>

<p>13—2 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2> </p>

<p>as it best to have a strong imagina- 
tion, or to be entirely without it ? 
An imaginative mind creates 
for itself a beautiful world; but upon entering 
into practical life, at every step, first one and 
then another portion of the structure is 
shattered till the entire fabric falls to pieces. 
Dust under foot and bitterness to the taste 
are all that remain; a void heart, a hopeless 
future, a weary present. The commonplace 
crushes the ideal as a cannon-ball might a 
statue. </p>

<p>The world, therefore, has long since 
decided that the imaginative is to be avoided. 
Have nothing to do with books, pictures. 

</p>



<p>sculpture, with thought or dream. Above 
all things be practical. </p>

<p>Those who do not possess an imagination 
are clearly the gainers in this life; horses, 
carriages, money, expensive wines, or, if they 
prefer it, the solid applause of well-to-do 
folk, are given to them. The imaginative 
dream of flowers, but the practical possess a 
garden. The infinite superiority of the non- 
imaginative is established. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had never any diffic\dty 
in choosing between these two courses — the 
imaginative and the practical — because he 
had not even imagination enough to se^ that 
there were two courses. By nature he was 
absolutely devoid of imagination. He took 
things as he saw them, and the idea of there 
being anything beyond never occurred to </p>

<p>him. </p>

<p>There were the hills visible from his win: 
dow; he knew by experience that hills were 
steep, and that a horse had to pull against 
the collar to draw him over them. The 

</p>

 </p>

<p>higher they were the thinner the soil, the 
smaller the crops, and the less rent to be 
obtained. Occasionally he glanced at them 
to see if the descending or ascending mist, 
the clearness or dimness of outline, promised 
rain or sunshine — and so much for the hills. 
This practical knowledge completed his con- 
cern in these mounds of chalk. </p>

<p>The depth of the rich blue sky, the sweep 
of the clouds, the sunrise, the colours of sun- 
set, the stars so clear seen at an altitude — 
these mere imaginative things were invisible 
to him altogether. He simply did not see 
them, any more than if a thick curtain had 
been drawn before his eyes. </p>

<p>The thoughts which flow from the contem- 
plation of the azure, the noble hope of 
sunrise, the god-like promise of the stars, 
were to him non-existent; as he could not 
see the things that suggested the thought, so 
his mind was blind to the thought itself. </p>

<p>Yet further, that scarce definable culture — 
that idea which exists in the heart and soul 

</p>



<p>independent of outward appearances — the 
sense of a beautiful inner life — so delicate a 
music was soundless to his ears. </p>

<p>The ground was solid under his feet ,- the 
sky afar off a mere translucent roof; the 
sun around ball of heat, never seen unless 
he chanced to be driving westwards towards 
sunset. He measured trees, and put a red 
mark against those to be felled, so many 
every year; they were timber — wood; they 
were hard, oak some of them; he could tell 
the cubical contents, and how many feet of 
planking they would saw up into. The shape 
of the oak, the shadow, the birds who came 
to it, all its varied associations— its dream — 
had no meaning to him. Sometimes he saw 
the sea, its green plain, from the higher 
ground; but it did not attract him to the 
shore. </p>

<p>Through the woods in spring-time his feet 
waded among pools, broad lakes of azure- 
purple, acres upon acres of blue-bells, so 
crowded they could not swing; he crushed 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the tender anemone; he passed the white 
June rose. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin never walked by the sea, 
nor gathered a flower. </p>

<p>The old books which had accumulated in 
the house of his forefathers remained upon 
the shelves untouched. Since his school- 
days, when it was compulsory, he had never 
opened any other book than the almanack. . </p>

<p>He handled cattle and sheep, he inspected 
horses, he visited men at plough, at harrow, 
at harvest, at building, at sawing, smith's 
work, every kind of labour. He attended 
markets and fairs, he drove and rode to and 
fro; he kept his accounts; he looked to 
every detail of the estate and of his own 
farm. He was always in action; when he 
returned from a long day's round, so soon as 
he alighted he walked briskly down into the 
garden to see if the gardener had fulfilled a 
full day's task. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin drove men as cattle are 
never driven. For cattle are let linger by 

</p>



<p>the roadside that they may crop the clover 
which likes to grow in trodden places; cattle 
are permitted to drink at the pond, and to 
rest in the shade of the elm-trees. The 
evening comes and they are turned into a 
field to graze, and chew the cud, and con- 
sider, as it were, till the morning. </p>

<p>No man rested that Robert Godwin could 
get at to drive. His own farm labourers, 
the men who did the estate work, the wood- 
cutters, the drain-diggers, the masons and 
smiths, the very messengers to and fro the 
Squire's house and his farm — he drove them 
all. He would waylay tjie rural postman at 
six in the morning, and bully him for not 
coming at half-past five : what business had 
he to waste time taking a draught of milk at 
the farmhouse yonder? He should be re- 
ported. Robert Godwin stood at the stile 
and shouted to the children, and threatened 
them with the stick if they did not hasten on 
to school. </p>

<p>Yet when Robert Godwin's back was 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>turned and the hedge had hidden him from 
view, the ploughman relaxed his hold on the 
stilts of his plough, and the team stayed as 
he listened to the peaceful caw of the rooks. 
But Godwin's back was never turned upon 
himself. He drove himself for ever. He 
was always up at six, often at five; from then 
till dusk he moved to and fro his own farm, 
and the estate he managed; after dusk a 
cheap candle was lit for him, and he worked 
at his accounts till bedtime. He never 
listened to the caw, caw of the rooks. </p>

<p>Reading by the open window of a sunny 
day, when the mind for a moment pauses 
from its dwelling on the page, and the glance 
goes out into the light, it is very pleasant to 
hear them — these peaceful rooks caw, caw- 
ing over to their favourite furrows. Doubt- 
less you have heard them and rested. 
Robert Godwin never heard them. </p>

<p>Incessant physical occupation was a neces- 
sity of his existence. But surely there must 
have been times when, his hands being still 

</p>



<p>and his frame reposing in the early evening, 
'between the lights/ his mind roamed in 
reverie, when fancy bore sway, when a dream 
or thought came to him ? </p>

<p>No. When his hands were still and his 
frame reposed, his mind was simply vacant, 
like that of a horse looking from his stable- 
door, or a dog by his kennel. He saw the 
wall, or the fireplace, nothing more. His 
mind was simply quiescent — vacant — like a 
mirror turned face downwards, as old country- 
folk place them on the bed in a storm of 
thunder and lightning. </p>

<p>In such a position the glass reflects 
nothing, and so when his hands were still 
Godwin's mind reflected nothing. It did 
not work within itself. Thus it was that on 
lying down at bedtime he fell instantly 
asleep, sound, undisturbed, complete, like an 
animal's. No long train of aerial fancies 
passed through his mind; that organ, like a 
muscle unemployed, fell into perfect repose. </p>

<p>This incessant work was not persevered in 

</p>

 </p>

<p>as a ' religion,' such as it is the fashion nowa- 
days to * dignify ' toil for the benefit of those 
who own factories. Nor was it the restless 
energy of a great genius, for Godwin had no 
ambition, and to drive nails in a carpenter's 
shop would have contented him as well as to 
lead the army at Pharsalia, Nor was it 
nervous restlessness; he was quite without 
nerves. It was his nature. </p>

<p>Just as rooks fly because they are rooks, 
so Godwin worked because he was Godwin, 
worked and accumulated money, and drove 
himself, and every human being with whom 
he came into the smallest contact, and knew 
no more rest or fatigue than the old mill-wheel. </p>

<p>His forefathers had had money; it was a 
family, a hereditary trait — this faculty for 
accumulation. Robert got together more, 
and it was whispered that he had lent a 
large sum to the Squire. Certainly his will 
was law on the Cornleigh estate; it was no 
use appealing to the Squire, who merely 
referred applicants back to his steward. 

</p>

<p>THE DEWY morn: 205 </p>

<p>There could not have been a more faithful 
steward. There was not a halfpenny wasted 
on that property, not the value of a rusty 
nail. Economy, rigid control, perfect ac- 
counts; every shilling brought to the board. 
Everything organized and in order; no con- 
fusion, no uncertainty. Above all, no weak 
paltering with tenants who had had losses, 
or suffered from illness or infirmity; no feeble 
yielding to the entreaties of the widow, or 
the fatherless children, or the unfortunate. 
The same rigid rule was applied unfalteringly 
to all alike, so that there could be no 
favouritism : * Pay or go.' </p>

<p>The steward allowed no time, consented 
to no compromise. * Pay or go.' Three 
omnipotent words, which brought to the 
Squire's pockets an unfailing supply of gold 
twice a year. </p>

<p>Some did, indeed, say that the reputation 
thereby acquired prevented tenants with 
large capital from applying when farms were 
vacant; they would rather go farther and 

</p>

<p>2o6 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>have more freedom and kindliness of treat- 
ment. However that might be, for the 
present, at all events, the Godwin rule was a 
success. </p>

<p>It was thought that the succession of bad 
seasons must necessitate a relaxation of this 
iron government, but fortune sometimes 
favours the hardest natures, and in this case 
favoured Robert Godwin. By a piece of 
good luck that neighbourhood did not suffer 
so severely at first as many districts; the 
crops were below the average, but not so 
seriously; some little allowance had to be 
made, but not much; the tenants certainly 
lost money, yet they could not make out a 
sufficiently pressing case to obtain much 
reduction of rent. Of late there had been 
more serious complaint. No appreciable 
difference was caused in the Godwin govern- 
ment. </p>

<p>He was ever on the alert, just the same, 
to detect the least infringement of the strict 
letter of the agreement; ever ready with 

</p>



<p>objections if any expenditure was applied for; 
always watching for an opportunity to assert 
the authority of his master. </p>

<p>A labourer began to build a hut on waste 
ground by the wayside. Godwin had the 
materials carted away, as he had commenced 
without permission from the lord of the 
manor. A cottager had made a garden in a 
hedge, leaving enough of the fence each side 
to prevent cattle straying; he worked on the 
estate, but Godwin spied out the encroach- 
ment and had quickset thorns planted among 
the potatoes. </p>

<p>The thatched roofs of the cottages in one 
of the hamlets were rotten, and let the rain 
through; the poor inhabitants begged for 
repairs. Nothing of the sort : they could buy 
straw and repair the roofs if they wished; if 
not, the wet might drip on their beds. </p>

<p>Enclosure of the common had already 
begun when Mr. Goring came forward and 
contested the right of Cornleigh Cornleigh, 
Esq., to enclose. Godwin blustered and 

</p>

<p>2o8 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>thundered; letters were written on blue paper; 
but public opinion had been drawn to the 
question, emissaries from powerful societies 
appeared on the scene, and the scheme was 
let drop. </p>

<p>Some day, perhaps, Mr. Goring would 
leave. These objectors have never much 
status or stability. They are not fixed like 
great hereditary owners. The Pope is dead — 
long live the Pope ! The interests of here- 
ditar)' estates are handed on generation after 
generation, much like the will of Peter the 
Great; but objectors, such as Mr. Goring, 
usually disappear in a few years. The hand 
that repairs the embankment once withdrawn, 
the sea soon rushes in. </p>

<p>Godwin was ceaselessly on the alert to 
extend the authority of his employer. Foot- 
paths were stopped, and odd corners of waste 
ground enclosed with stone walls costing 
thrice the value of the land, in order that no 
one might 'squat' and presently assert a right 
to a few square yards of their own country. 

</p>



<p>These proceedings were by no means con- 
fined to the outlying agricultural places, 
where the well-to-do people were almost 
all tenants, and the remainder poor and 
without organization. Robert Godwin 
attacked the town with equal zest and equal 
success. The Cornleigh Cornleigh property 
included a considerable part of the town, and 
his * rights * extended more or less over the 
rest. </p>

<p>Except by long and costly legal process it 
was impossible to tell where those * rights * 
really began or ended. The steward made 
the fullest use of this uncertainty. Old by- 
ways and paths were blocked, cprners en- 
closed, possession asserted and taken, and 
not a voice was raised. The whole town was 
straitened, and a band as it were drawn tight 
about it so that it could scarce breathe. </p>

<p>The park was closed, though the inhabitants 
had used it for a hundred years as a recrea- 
tion ground, and had undoubted claims to 
roads across it. Not a voice was raised^ </p>

<p>VOL. I. 14 

</p>

<p>2IO THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>Old inhabitants retained a respect for * the 
family/ and would not oppose its will. 
Tradespeople wished to enjoy its custom 
and patronage, though, as a matter of fact, 
they got neither, as ' the family ' bought all 
they required in London; still they did not 
like to shut the door in their own faces. 
There were not enough shoemakers in Maas- 
bury. </p>

<p>Long since there had been a glove in- 
dustry in the surrounding villages — an in- 
dustry at which the poor folk worked in their 
own cottages. For the most part it had dis- 
appeared, yet to this day the magistrates 
could distinguish the hamlets where it had 
once flourished by the records in their books. 
To this day half the cases brought before 
them came from these hamlets. </p>

<p>Your artisan who works at home — ^your 
cottage glovemaker, or shoemaker — is a 
terrible radical, a fearful character, a fre- 
quenter of taverns, a fisticuff fellow, and 
above all things a contemner of authority. 

</p>



<p>He will get into trouble for no other purpose 
than to show his despite of authority. His 
descendants had it in their blood, and still 
continued to exhibit the same disposition. 
But the industry had died out, and there 
were no shoemakers to speak of in Maasbury 
town. Consequently Mr. Godwin ruled as 
he chose. </p>

<p>The result was that the property was 
trimmed, walled, enclosed, and improved in 
every possible manner. Had it been set out 
to sale, the auctioneer could have honestly 
laid stress on the singular completeness of 
the estate. It was in perfect order. The 
• family ' reaped that advantage. </p>

<p>A breathless hatred of Robert Godwin 
prevailed from north to south, east to west, 
of that broad stretch of land. From the 
tenant of a thousand acres, and the wealthy 
tradesman (like Rosa's father) down to the 
miserable old woman in her shanty, living on 
tea and soaked bread, the hatred of Robert 
Godwin was universal. </p>

<p>14—2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>The well-to-do exhibited this feeling by- 
asking him to every entertainment they gave 
— invitations seldom accepted, for Godwin 
was a solitary man — by publicly praising him 
at every meeting, by treating him with the 
greatest respect, and by holding their tongues 
in private. No one ever abused Robert 
Godwin. </p>

<p>Even the old women did not curse him, as 
they do in story-books, for they have come 
to learn — these old women — in the nine- 
teenth century that curses are as harmless as 
thistledown. They looked after him as he 
passed — ^simply folded their arms and looked 
after him. </p>

<p>His mind, hard set upon the subject in 
hand, was clear and practical, consequently 
upon agricultural topics, and such as came 
within his reach, Godwin could make a 
good speech. He frequently spoke, express- 
ing himself in plain and forcible language; 
his speeches appeared in full in the local 

</p>



<p>prints, and were even transferred to the 
London agricultural papers. He possessed 
a considerable reputation of this kind, and 
justly so, for he spoke out of the fulness of 
practical knowledge. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XX</h2> 

</p>

<p>XCEPT I describe Robert God- 
win's works and that which he 
did, it is impossible to describe 
him. For he was not a thinker, a dreamer, 
a man of feeling; there was no light and 
shade in his character. To understand him 
you must know not what he felt, but what he 
did. Now these were the works of Robert 
Godwin. </p>

<p>I do not think that he intended to be 
harsh in his dealings with his fellows. It 
was simply an absolute want of imagination. 
He was no set villain of a piece, no un- 
scrupulous tyrant for the sake of evil. There 
was no cruelty in his nature. No one ever 

</p>



<p>saw him thrash his horse mercilessly, or kick 
his dog. </p>

<p>Of the suffering to human beings caused 
by his conduct, he was entirely oblivious, nor 
could you by any possible method have ex- 
plained it to him. He lacked the imagina- 
tion to put himself in the place of the 
wretched. </p>

<p>It was this faculty which enabled the tor- 
turers in the Middle Ages to tear human 
creatures limb from limb, to thrust red-hot 
iron into the victim, to smash every bone on 
the wheel, to carry out orders of so ghastly a 
character that not even the sober historian 
in our time dares to record them on his page. 
They remain in Latin — as it were whispered 
in ancient books. </p>

<p>In our day this faculty is by no means 
extinct: twelve hundred men announced 
themselves possessed of it when they applied 
for the hangman's office. </p>

<p>I call it a faculty, for really it seems so, 
instead of the lack of a faculty; just as cold 

</p>

<p>2i6 THE DEWY MORS. 

— frost — seems to one's feelings a real thing, 
and not merely the absence of heaL </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had not the least idea of 
the misery he often caused, simply because 
he possessed the faculty of not seeing — the 
faculty of no imagination. That he seemed 
in most cases devoid of rancour was often 
remarked; after quarrelling most furiously, 
he would shake hands next day as if nothing 
had happened. But then there was nothing 
in his goodwill — he had no goodwill. </p>

<p>He was absolutely honest, except in a 
horse-deal, in which it is mutually understood 
that every man shall cheat his neighbour. 
His mere nod was his bond. The word of 
Robert Godwin was like the signed and 
sealed bond of a great railway company — 
negotiable; his word was negotiable. That 
is, if a man said Godwin had promised, you 
dealt on the faith of that bare word. </p>

<p>This much said, last of all, Robert Godwin 
was no hypocrite. He made no profession of 
Christian charity; he never entered a church.. 

</p>



<p>Not that he was an opponent of the Church; 
he was simply indifferent. </p>

<p>No one ever got touch of Robert Godwin. 
The man was always alone. While he 
measured a tree with the woodman standing 
t)y; while he rated the ploughman; while he 
t)argained in the market, hustled and shoved 
by the crowd; while he spoke in public; if 
you sat with him in his house, still Robert 
Godwin was apart, separate, a distinct per- 
sonality. His spirit never blended with the 
society about him. </p>

<p>His sister had lived with him as house- 
keeper year after year, and she knew no 
more of him than a stranger. He made no 
mystery of anything, yet he was impenetrable. 
She had inherited the Godwin faculty of no 
imagination; her mind, once the household 
duties over, fell at once into vacancy. She 
sat still and grew immensely fat. </p>

<p>The reason of Godwin's intense personality 
was his concentration. He was fixed, ^ibsorbed 
in himself; he neither saw nor heard any- 

</p>

<p>2i8 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>thing. He was conscious of himself only. 
The cun'ing outline of the hills, the white 
clouds, the sunset, were invisible to him. </p>

<p>Riding away on his new horse Ruy from 
Mr. Goring's porch that lovely sununer day, 
Robert Godwin went straight into the town, 
executed some business there, returned home, 
put up his horse, and at once walked out into 
the fields to his men. He never stayed his 
hand till night; when the last labourers had 
gone slowly homewards, he was still doing 
something. </p>

<p>But even the long, long summer evening 
— Felise passed it sitting by the sundial 
dreaming — the long summer evening went 
away at last. Dusky shadows crept out and 
filled the comers of the fields; the orchards 
became gloomy; the large bats flew to and 
fro in the upper air; the lesser bats fluttered 
round the eaves. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin took his candle up into his 
bedroom, which was at the same time his 
study or private office. Probably in his grim 

</p>



<p>father's time it was the only room in which 
he could find any peace, and the habit of 
working there having once been established 
could not be set aside. The washstand was 
placed by a small window — a window deep 
in the embrasure necessitated by a thick old 
wall. Upon one end of this washstand 
Robert wrote; it was a large stand intended 
for two ewers, but only one stood on it, 
cobwebbed, for it was never used. </p>

<p>At the end of the washstand next the 
window Robert had his ink, his pens, and 
blotting-paper; his letters, documents, and 
papers were on the window-ledge, piles of 
them which could be seen from the garden 
beneath. Here he worked every evening, in 
solitude, by the light of one cheap candle. </p>

<p>This evening Robert worked later than 
usual, till his sister, weary of waiting, had her 
supper, and presently retired. By-and-by 
the last letter was finished, the last account 
added up, the last note jotted down; there 
was no more writing to be done. He took 

</p>

 </p>

<p>his letters out to the gate by the road, where 
he had a private box cleared by the mail-cart 
driver who passed about midnight. </p>

<p>Next he went round to the other gate in 
the garden to see if it was locked. From 
thence he visited the stables, and heard Ruy 
move in his stall; and then round the rick- 
yard to see if any wandering vagabond dared 
to creep under a rick to sleep. As he passed 
the pump in the yard he tried it, to see if it 
acted properly; his hands could let nothing 
alone. Finally, he crossed his arms on the 
top bar of the gate leading into the meadows, 
and looked straight out across the fields. </p>

<p>Something, perhaps a hare, rushed away; 
he did not regard it in the least. The dog 
in the kennel yawned, shook himself, and 
looked out at his master, who never stroked 
him. </p>

<p>Dew was falling thickly, and in the distance 
a thin white vapour marked the course of the 
stream. The still trees, heavily laden with 
their foliage, were silent; there was not the 

</p>



<p>faintest rustle, and nothing appeared to move 
in their shadows. Once a bird, perhaps a 
whitethroat, chattered a little in the hedge; 
but his voice sank quickly. In the warm 
stillness of the summer night there came 
a far-off rushing sound, very faint; it was 
the cascade, at the trout-pool where Felise 
bathed. </p>

<p>Above, the clear sky was full of stars, and 
among them the beautiful planet Jupiter 
shone serene. The sky was of a lovely 
night-blue; it was an hour to think, to 
dream, to revere, to love — a time when, if 
ever it will, the soul reigns, and the coarse 
rude acts of day are forgotten in the aspira- 
tions of the inmost mind. </p>

<p>The Night was calm — still; it was in no 
haste to do anything — it had nothing it 
needed to do. To be is enough for the 
stars. </p>

<p>Robert did not notice any difference in the 
night; he had seen hundreds of nights. He 
was listening for the roll of the mail-cart 

</p>

 </p>

<p>wheels. After a time they came; the cart 
stopped; the driver collected the letters, and 
went on. There was no delivery by this 
mail, only a collection. </p>

<p>Robert returned to his bedroom, took off 
his coat, looked at his bed, and put on his 
coat again. He did not care to lie down. 
He lighted a great stable-lantern, and went 
out of doors again. </p>

<p>The hasp of the gate against which he 
had leaned was a little shaky and loose; 
he found the tools, went to work, and put it 
to rights. Then he went into the orchard 
to the garden-house, and examined the 
gardener's tools, one by one, to see if they 
had been roughly used, or injured; if so, the 
man must pay. The man had been digging; 
with the lantern in his hand Robert paced 
the distance dug to see how many yards he 
had completed. </p>

<p>Robert went to the stable, looked in at 
Ruy, climbed up into the tallet, and spied 
about to see if any forage had been stolen. 

</p>



<p>He examined the carter's collection of horse- 
hair — his perquisite — to see if it was accu- 
mulating too fast. </p>

<p>He brought out a stool and saw, and 
sawed up firewood till he had made a goodly 
heap. He would have done more, but that 
would encourage waste. If only a little was 
cut up, only a little would be used. </p>

<p>He planed a piece of timber intended for 
the head of a gate. He counted the poles 
aslant against the wood-pile. Nothing else 
remaining that he could do, he returned to 
the garden, took off his coat, set the lantern 
on the grass, and dug where the gardener 
had left off. While he dug the night went 
on — the night that was in no haste to do 
anything; and by degrees a pale light grew 
up above the eastern horizon. The dawn 
comes early in summer. </p>

<p>Still Robert dug steadily on till the other 
mail-cart — the down mail — approached. He 
stopped and listened; the driver did not pull 
up, so there were no letters. Robert scraped 

</p>

 </p>

<p>his boots, put away the spade, blew out the 
lantern, and went indoors. </p>

<p>By the pale white light he looked again at 
his bed; but he could not lie down. There was 
no rest in him that night He lit his cheap 
candle and went up into the attic overhead, 
where he had not been for years. The shutters 
were perpetually closed up there, so that the 
place was partly dark, although streaks of 
dawn came through the chinks. The great 
bare room was full of ancient lumber. </p>

<p>He set the candle on an oak press and fell 
to work, sorting the confused mass which 
strewed the floor. Old chairs — some broken, 
some perfect — a picture or two, hair-trunks, 
books, bundles of newspapers, pieces of chain 
— odd lengths thrown aside — nameless odds 
and ends, such as candlesticks, parts of im- 
plements, the waste of a century, all covered 
with dust, and dead black cobwebs. Dead 
cobwebs thick with dust, not the fine clean 
threads the spider has in use; webs which 
had been abandoned fifty years ago. 

</p>



<p>The skeleton of a bird lay at the bottom 
of a hollow in the pile, perhaps an injured 
swallow that had crept in there to die. A 
pair of flintlock pistols, the flints stJU in the 
hammers, were in very good condition, 
scarcely rusted; Robert snicked the locks 
and examined them carefully. He was black 
with dust and cobwebs. </p>

<p>Chairs and furniture he threw on one side^ 
boxes on another, papers and books in a 
corner, and soon began to make order of 
confusion. </p>

<p>The light of morning came stronger through 
the chinks; the flame of the candle appeared 
yellow. The alchemy of light was changing 
the sky without. </p>

<p>He worked on till footsteps sounded on 
the paths outside, the carters had come to 
see to the horses. There was some one at 
last to drive. </p>

<p>Robert went downstairs, and out to the 
pump; there he washed himself in the open 
air, as he had been made to do years and </p>

<p>VOL. I. 15 

</p>

 </p>

<p>years ago in his stem old father's time. The 
habit adhered still; the man was indeed all 
habit. Then he visited the stables, and 
began to drive the carters; the night was 
over, the day had begun. </p>

<p>Overhead and eastwards there shone a 
glory of blue heaven, illuminated from within 
with golden light. The deep rich azure was 
lit up with an inner gold; it was a time to 
worship, to lift up the heart. Is there any- 
thing so wondrously beautiful as the sky just 
before the sun rises in summer ? </p>

<p>There was a sound of cart-horses stamping 
heavily, the rattle and creak of harness, the 
shiiffle of feet; a man came out with a set 
forehead, grumbling and muttering; the 
driver was at work. </p>

<p>No one heeded the alchemy proceeding in 
the east, which drew forth gold and made it 
shine in the purple. 


</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXI</h2> 

</p>

<p>SINCE Robert Godwin could not by 
the effort of a lifetime have sum- 
moned up sufficient imagination to 
tell his own story, I must do the romance for 
him, and explain why he could not sleep that 
night. You now know the man, who could 
rout about dusty lumber that his hands might 
be employed, who could not see the sky 
Here is his romance. </p>

<p>Nine years ago, that very time of the year, 
Robert Godwin, starting forth into the fields 
one day, saw a trespasser in a meadow of 
mowing-grass. A trespasser rolling about in 
the sacred mowing-grass, wilfully damaging 
it — with the aid of a dog, too. </p>

<p>15—2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>To walk among mowing-grass is a guilty 
thing, you must understand, in country 
places. This meadow in particular did not 
concern Godwin, but the fact of trespassing 
did; he could not have passed a trespasser 
without ordering the criminal off any more 
than a dog could pass a bone. He walked 
rapidly towards the place, full of hard lan- 
guage, bitter words and threats, swelling with 
eagerness to drive this daring human being. 
As he came near he was astounded at the 
absolute abandon of the youthful sinner; she 
not only trespassed, she revelled in her 
wickedness. </p>

<p>It was a girl about ten or eleven, tall for 
her age, and with her a great spaniel; to- 
gether they were making themselves joyful 
in the flower-strewn grass. </p>

<p>Sometimes she ran, and leaped, and danced 
in the beautiful sweet grass which rose 
above her knees. Sometimes she threw her- 
self at full length in it, lying down on the 
breast of the earth, as a swimmer lies on 

</p>



<p>the breast of the sea. As children dance and 
play without much covering on the sands in 
their innocence, so in her wild gambols her 
short frock permitted the shape of her limbs 
to be occasionally seen. </p>

<p>Her hands were full of clover-blossoms; 
she threw them away and gathered the large 
daisies; she scattered the daisies and took 
buttercups and blue veronica; she laughed 
and whistled — quite a real whistle — she 
caught her foot and tumbled, and shouted. 
The spaniel charged her as she lay extended, 
charged over her and rolled her down again. 
Together they romped, utterly unaware of the 
Terror that was approaching them with swift 
•strides. </p>

<p>Her long golden hair, one mass of ringlets, 
was spread about upon the grass, as she lay 
on her back — the spaniel had his heavy paws 
on her chest — one knee was raised among 
the golden buttercups, and the sun shone on 
its exquisite whiteness. She was panting 
and laughing, almost unable to move from 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the weight of the spaniel and her own ex- 
haustion. </p>

<p>The Terror was very near — the Terror 
could easily have captured her; but now a 
singular incident occurred. </p>

<p>At a. distance of ten short paces Robert 
Godwin stopped, looked fixedly, suddenly 
turned on his heel, and returned the way he 
had come without a word. </p>

<p>Almost directly his back was turned the 
spaniel saw him, and began to bark; and the 
girl sat up and began instinctively to arrange 
her frock, and get her hair in order. But 
Robert Godwin did not look back. </p>

<p>The child was Felise Goring, then but 
recently arrived at her uncle's upon the loss 
of her father, whom she could not regret 
because she had never known him — he had 
been in India so long. She remembered the 
grass — just remembered it — about the house 
she had lived in when she first began to 
walk. She came to it again from the streets 
and confinement of a London suburb. 

</p>

 231 

/ </p>

<p>Imagine the child's delight — the fields to 
roam in— liberty — the great dog; all the 
happy sunny freedom children enjoy in the 
country. No matter how kind their parents 
may be, no matter how fortunate their cir- 
cumstances, the children in cities never know 
the joyousness of the country. </p>

<p>The grass to walk on; the flowers to 
gather; the horses to watch; the new milk; 
the delicious butter; the brook to ramble 
by; the pond to fish in; the hay to throw 
about; the very ladders to climb; and the 
thick hedges to get in as if they were woods. 
No gold can purchase these things in cities. 
They are to be pitied whose youth has been 
spent in streets, though they may succeed 
to the counting-house where millions are 
made. </p>

<p>All of you with little children, and who have 
no need to count expense, or even if you 
have such need, take them somehow into the 
country among green grass and yellow wheat 
■ — among trees — by hills and streams, if you 

</p>

 </p>

<p>wish their highest education, that of the 
heart and the soul, to be completed. </p>

<p>Therein shall they find a Secret — a know- 
ledge not to be written, not to be found in 
books. They shall know the sun and the 
wind, the running water, and the breast of 
the broad earth. Under the green spray, 
among the hazel boughs where the nightingale 
sings, they shall find a Secret, a feeling, a 
sense that fills the heart with an emotion 
never to be forgotten. They will forget 
their books — they will never forget the 
grassy fields. </p>

<p>If you wish your children to think deep 
things — to know the holiest emotions, take 
them to the woods and hills, and give them 
the freedom of the meadows. </p>

<p>It is of no use to palter with your conscience 
and say, * They have everything; they have 
expensive toys, story-books without end; we 
never go anywhere without bringing them 
home something to amuse them; they have 
been to the seaside, and actually to Paris; 

</p>



<p>it is absurd, they cannot want anything 
more.* </p>

<p>But they do want, something more, with- 
out which all this expensive spoiling is quite 
thrown away. They want the unconscious 
teaching of the country, and without that 
they will never know the truths of this life. 
They need to feel — unconsciously — the in- 
fluence of the air that blows, sun-sweetened, 
over fragrant hay; to feel the influence of 
deep shady woods, mile- deep in boughs — 
the stream — the high hills; they need to 
revel in long grass. Put away their books, 
and give them the freedom of the meadows. 
Do it at any cost or trouble to yourselves, if 
you wish them to become great men and 
noble women. </p>

<p>Indulgent to all, Mr. Goring was neces- 
sarily yet more indulgent to this great 
beautiful girl suddenly thrown on his hands. 
For she was beautiful already, although with 
that unshapen, uncertain irregularity which 
promises better in childhood than regularity. 

</p>

 </p>

<p>If a girls features are regular as a child, if 
already lovely, it is rare for her to be a beau- 
tiful woman. Neither the face nor the form 
must be finished too soon. </p>

<p>Felise's face suggested, her form already 
hinted at, loveliness to come when the bold 
first strokes of Nature were filled in. </p>

<p>To recognise such strokes of Nature in 
their inception, and to observe their relation 
to each other and to the general shape, is a 
pleasure of the most exquisite kind. If the 
growth and unfolding of a flower be beau- 
tiful, how much more so the growth of a 
woman ! </p>

<p>Robert Godwin's thought from that hour 
never varied from the child whom he had 
intended to have driven with harsh reviling 
from the meadow. I do not say that he 
loved her from the moment he saw her; he 
had no imagination. His heart was not pre- 
pared with fancy and ready to love; but his 
thought dwelt upon her, and love steadily 
grew within him. 

</p>



<p>So intensely concentrated a nature could 
not love by halves — could not admire, or 
sigh, and pass on and amuse itself elsewhere. 
Once set, the plant grew and filled his whole 
life. It came about in time that Robert 
Godwin never thought of anything else but 
Felise Goring. </p>

<p>While his hands worked, as you have seen 
them; while his lips uttered hard words, or 
while his mind added figure to figure at his 
washstand-desk, Felise filled his entire inner 
existence. He lived in a dream, this dream- 
less man; he was absorbed in one idea — an 
idea so fixed that his mind was vacant His 
hands moved with no consciousness behind 
them, as the wheels pf a machine go round. </p>

<p>Work over, he slept at once without any 
interval of love-like reverie; for he carried 
Felise instantly with him into his slumber, so 
fixed was her image in his mind. His ab- 
straction was complete. The form of Robert 
Godwin walked among the fields, and rode 
along the roads; the lips of Robert Godwin 

</p>

 </p>

<p>gave forth articulate sound; the signature of 
Robert Godwin was traced upon the cheque — 
but Robert Godwin, the personality, was not 
there. His mind was with Felise. </p>

<p>It is said that women above all things like 
to be loved. Very rarely is a woman loved 
as Godwin loved, such utter abstraction, such 
loss of self-existence, such death of self-exist- 
ence. The woman that he loved should 
have been happy. But in Paris they say, 
that woman is indeed happy to be loved, but 
only when the lover can minister to her 
vanity. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had no knowledge what- 
ever of such studies of woman's heart, some 
base and worthless, some true; yet his clear- 
ness of intellect (consequent upon the short- 
ness of his view, not its breadth; he held 
everything, as it were, close to his mind, as 
people with dim sight hold all things close 
to their eyes) — his clearness of intellect in- 
stinctively told him that Felise was not for 
him; he could never be anything to her. 

</p>



<p>The Parisian would put it in this way : 
He comprehended that there was nothing 
about him that could flatter or excite her 
vanity. </p>

<p>rj^He loved her and gave her up at the same 
time. He loved her more and more as the 
years drew on, and year by year he acknow- 
ledged to himself that the gulf between them 
grew more and more impassable. </p>

<p>At that moment in the meadow he was 
already forty; she was ten or eleven. Yet 
it was not the difference of age; it was the 
total, world-wide difference of personality. </p>

<p>Now he was forty-nine, Felise nineteen — 
nearly twenty. Nine great wedges had been 
driven in by Time to split their lives 
asunder. </p>

<p>Upright, strong, without one grey flieck in 
his dark hair, Godwin had not altered an 
atom in those nine years. He was as 
vigorous, as full of manhood as at twenty- 
one. But still he was forty-nine; he was on 
the verge of fifty. 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>Can you imagine a woman in solitude 
weighing these words on her lips, * He is on 
the verge of fifty ' ? </p>

<p>Yet it was not the years; it was the total, 
the world-wide difference of personality. 
Godwin, all these nine years, had held the 
matter up close to his mind, and every day 
the certainty grew more certain, the fact more 
palpable, that she was not for him. By no 
possible manner of means could Felise ever 
come to care for Robert Godwin. </p>

<p>In all that time scarcely a day went by 
that he did not see her. The two houses 
were hardly half a mile apart; the girl was in 
the fields constantly, and he was always 
riding or walking across them. He never 
purposely approached her, but his path fre- 
quently brought him near; sometimes they 
met. Her existence was always before his 
eyes. 

</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXII</h2> 

|HE thought of nothing but the sun 
and wind, the flowers and the run- 
ning stream. She listened to the 
wind in the trees and began herself to sing. 
The child was led along by unknown im- 
pulses, as if voices issued from the woods 
calling her to enter. It would have been im- 
possible for her to tell why she was so happy 
in the freedom of the fields. </p>

<p>Not once now and then, or one day only, 
when the smiling hours of early June lit the 
meadows, but every day, the year round, 
Felise went forth with the same joy. </p>

<p>She trod the paths to their utmost ending, 
through meads and wheatfields, round the 

</p>

 </p>

<p>skirt of copses where pheasants feeding 
hurried in at her coming, or wood-pigeons 
rose with a clatter from the firs. Climbing 
the rugged stiles, treading the bending plank 
stretched across the streamlet, stepping from 
stone to stone in the watery ways where 
woods and marshes met, up the steep hill 
where the shepherds had cut steps in the 
turf, she traced the path to its ending. 
Through the long lanes, hazel-boughs on one 
side, hawthorn on the other; along the rude 
waggon-tracks winding in and out the corn; 
by shadowy green arcades of the covers; by 
deep valleys, sunless because of the massy 
beeches high on the slopes. </p>

<p>There was not a spot made beautiful by 
trees and hedges, by grass and flowers, and 
sun and shade, that she had not visited and 
lingered in. She knew when each would 
look at its loveliest — the corner of maple- 
bushes when the first frosts had yellowed the 
spray and strewn the sward with colour of 
leaves; the row of oaks when the acorns 

</p>

 241 

</p>

<p>were ripe, and the rooks above and the 
pheasants beneath were feasting; the meadow 
where the purple orchis grew in the first days 
of May; the osier-beds where the marsh 
marigolds flowered, and again in the time of 
the yellow iris. </p>

<p>She knew where the hill, lifting itself in a 
bold brow thrown forward from the range, 
gave a view over the wooded plain almost 
to the horizon; where the downs opening in 
a pass, the broad green sea gleamed out to 
the clouds. </p>

<p>The place where the stream ran at the 
foot of a cliff, overshadowed by the trees on 
the summit; where it came again to sweet 
meads, moving between its banks without a 
sound except what the birds made for it 
calling in the sedges. </p>

<p>The time when the fields were fullest of 
flowers; the time when the green wheat 
began to grow tall, and to contain wheatears 
like hidden treasures among its innumerable 
stalks; the time when it became golden; the </p>

<p>VOL. I. 16 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>time when the partridges called at even in 
the short stubble. </p>

<p>The sound of the wind in the oaks and in 
the pines; the rush it came with across the 
grass; the rustle of the dry corn swinging. </p>

<p>The light of the sun shining on the green 
sward, on the tree-tops, on the clouds at 
sunset. </p>

<p>Storms darkening the face of heaven; 
strong gales casting fragments of branches 
afar from the trees; thunder rolling back in 
heavier echoes from the hills;, lightning 
springing athwart the darkness. </p>

<p>The blackness of frost; the white of the 
snow; the crystal rime in the early morning; 
the heavy days of long, long rain; moaning 
wind in the elms. </p>

<p>The first swallow, and the hawthorn leaf 
green on the dark bough; the song of the 
nightingale; the first call of the cuckoo; the 
first apple-bloom; the first scent of the hay; 
the first sheaf of wheat; the first beech- 
boughs turning red and gold. 

</p>



<p>The coming of the redwings, and the field- 
fares; the thrushes singing again in the mild 
autumn days; the last harebell from the hill. </p>

<p>The stars rising, constellation by constella- 
tion, as the year went on; those that had 
fulfilled their time of shining in the evening 
sky marching to the westwards, while others 
came up in the east. The visible path of the 
earth rolling onward in space, made visible 
by night to those who watch the stars — 
visible by day in the shortening shadows 
of summer noon, and the long shadows of 
winter. </p>

<p>The glowing planets — calm Jupiter, red 
Mars, silvery Venus — glowing over the trees 
in the evening. </p>

<p>Swallows building under the eaves — 
swallows building in the chimneys; thrushes 
in the hawthorn-bushes; great missel-thrushes 
in the apple-trees of the orchard; the blue </p>

<p>sparrow's egg in the hedge; the chaffinch's 
moss and lichen nest against the elm; the 
dove's nest up in the copse, fearlessly build- </p>

<p>16 — 2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>ing because no rude hand disturbed them; 
the pheasant's eggs carelessly left on the 
ground by the bramble-bush, the corncrake's 
found by the mower; the moorhen's nest by 
the trout-pool. </p>

<p>She knew and loved them all^the colour 
and sound and light, the changing days, 
the creatures of the wood and of the field. 
With these she lived, and they became 
familiar to her, as the threads of the pattern 
are known to those who sit the livelong day 
embroidering — the woven embroidery of the 
earth; so beautiful, because without design. </p>

<p>Not so much the actual realities, the 
woods and hills, as the mystery that brooded 
among them. Yet * mystery' does not convey 
what she felt, for there was nothing concealed; 
rather it was the openness, the pure frank- 
ness of nature which drew her. Perhaps 
* glamour ' would be better — the glamour of 
the woodland and the grassy solitude. </p>

<p>It was noticed that she gathered very few 
flowers, sometimes only bringing home some 

</p>



<p>fragment of spray; it was what she felt among 
them that was so dear to her. </p>

<p>There were no women at Mr. Gorihg's 
to show her the delicate lines that divide 
decorum from impropriety. He dreaded at 
first lest she should insensibly contract the 
manners of the village girls, although she did 
not consort with them; but he was soon set 
at rest on that point. Her manners remained 
as in the beginning; all the freedom of the 
fields did not induce the slightest change. 
Except that she romped with the great 
spaniel now and then, there was nothing she 
did the most fastidious could find fault with. 
Relieved of this fear, he let her wander 
whither she listed. Once only she over- 
stepped the unwritten faw of the country; 
she rode her pony into some young wheat, 
and galloped him to and fro. </p>

<p>It was Robert Godwin's wheat, and he 
watched her do it in the wild delight of her 
youth. She had no thought of injury; she 
had found a broad open space, and she liked 

</p>

 </p>

<p>to spurn the earth and the fresh green blades 
of wheat beneath the pony's hoofs. </p>

<p>He did not interfere; he let her trample it 
as much as she pleased. She was the only 
human being he did not drive. </p>

<p>Felise was very contrite when it was ex- 
plained to her at home that she had done 
wrong; this happened in early days, not long 
after her arrival at Beechknoll. </p>

<p>Always out in the garden, or the field, or 
the copse with her uncle Goring, whom she 
called * papa,' he taught her the names of the 
trees and plants, the ways of the birds, the 
signs of spring, the indications of autumn. 
Sometimes he was trimming the shrubs in 
the garden, sometimes mending a gate, 
sometimes chopping poles with an axe in 
the copse. She brought a book and sat near 
him, every now and then asking questions — • 
called every now and then to observe some- 
thing. </p>

<p>The birds were bolder in this copse than 
elsewhere, for no gun was ever fired; even 

</p>



<p>the herons came to the pool and the stream 
unchecked. Nothing was interfered with; 
not even the weasels. Yet every wild 
creature abounded, despite the absence of 
trap, gin, and gun. </p>

<p>To Felise, this man who knew so much 
was an interpreter — ^translating for her the 
language of the trees, the words of the wind, 
the song of the sun at his rising and his 
setting, the still calm intent of the stars. 
His gardening and planting was in reality 
only a manner of self-employment, so that he 
might be ever under the sun by day, under 
the stars in the evening, that he might be 
out-of-doors face to face with the wonders of 
the earth and sky. </p>

<p>So that it was not only the physical joy of 
her strong limbs that led her to the hill to 
climb and run with the wind. It was the 
open secret of the day, the glamour of the 
light; it was her heart and soul as much and 
more than those strong limbs which gloried 
in the free air. 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>Felise grew and became beautiful. </p>

<p>There !^ were books at Beechknoll such as 
are seldom read outside the circle of the 
learned, though they are books far more 
interesting than those of modern days. The 
reason the classics are not read is because 
there still lingers a tradition, handed down 
from the eighteenth century, that it is useless 
to read them unless in the original. A tone 
of sarcastic contempt is maintained towards 
the person who shall presume to peruse 
Xenophon not in the original Greek, or 
Virgil not in the original Latin. </p>

<p>In the view of these critics it is the Greek, 
it is the Latin, that is valuable, not the con- 
tents of the volume. Shakespeare, however, 
the greatest genius of England, thought 
otherwise. It is known that his ideas of 
Grecian and Roman history were derived 
from somewhat rude translations, yet it is 
acknowledged that the spirit of the ancient </p>

<p>m </p>

<p>warriors and of the ancient luxury lives 
in his ' Antony and Cleopatra,' and nowhere 

</p>



<p>in all the ancient writers is there a poem 
breathing the idea of Aphrodite like his 
* Venus and Adonis.' The example of so 
great a genius may shield us in an effort to 
free the modern mind from this eighteenth 
century incubus. </p>

<p>The truth is, the classics are much better 
understood in a good translation than in the 
original. To obtain a sufficient knowledge 
of Greek, for instance, to accurately translate 
is almost the work of a lifetime. Concen- 
tration upon this one pursuit gradually con- 
tracts the general perceptions, and it has 
often happened that an excellent scholar has 
been deficient in common knowledge, as 
shown by the singular character of his own 
notes. But his work of translation in itself 
is another matter. </p>

<p>It is a treasure; from it poets derive their 
illustrations; dramatists their plots; painters 
their pictures. A young mind full of intelli- 
gence, coming to such a translation, enters at 
once into the spirit of the ancient writer. A 

</p>

<p>2 so THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>good translation is thus better than the 
original. </p>

<p>Such books Mr. Goring had accumulated 
for his own study; they were now opened to. 
Felise by the same kindly hand and voice 
that had opened to her the knowledge of the 
fields and woods. </p>

<p>She read the beautiful memoirs of Socrates, 
some parts of Plato, most of the histories, 
and the higher and purer poets. Therein 
she found expressed in words and metre the 
very ideas, the very feelings which had come 
to her in the flowery meadows and woodland 
solitudes; ideas and feelings that floated in 
her mind, but which she could not utter. 
Here they were — written down at the lips of 
the flowers that had faded two thousand 
years ago. </p>

<p>The soul of Greece — the pure soul of 
antique Greece — visited her as she read and 
dreamed. </p>

<p>Felise grew and became yet more beauti- 
ful. 

</p>



<p>Her heart, too, had grown within her — the 
heart of a woman as it is in its purest nature. 
She was unconvinced. No specious casuistry 
of the vain world or the false priest, no argu- 
ments of the tyrannic science of the nine- 
teenth century, nothing could convince her 
that the emotion of her heart was wrong. 
She was unconvinced. All the sophistry 
and chicanery, all the philosophy and the 
sociolc^y, all the statutes on the statute book, 
all the Acts of Parliament, would have utterly 
failed for one instant to shake that heart, 
would have failed to convince her that wrong 
was right, or that a lie was the truth. </p>

<p>Felise was unswervingly true to herself. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h2> </p>

<p>IND while her physical frame grew, 
and her moral being was 
strengthened, all these nine years 
from girlhood to womanhood, a colourless eye 
watched her — the eye of Robert Godwin, 
There is something grim — ^weird — almost 
terrible in the thought that even this pure 
and beautiful creature could not exist without 
so opposite a nature stealthily regarding it. </p>

<p>Not the faintest suspicion that Robert 
Godwin cared for Felise, or indeed for any 
woman, ever occurred to anyone. The man 
was so absolutely concentrated, it precluded 
the very idea of his thinking of a second 
person. 

</p>



<p>Had Godwin's concentration upon one 
fixed idea any influence in producing the 
hardness of his conduct towards those who 
happened to come under his sway ? Render- 
ing him more abstracted than he would 
otherwise have been, it closed his eyes to 
everything but his own will. Robert God- 
win was hard enough; Robert Godwin riding 
and walking, and acting in bodily form while 
his mind was absent, became a mere figure of 
stone. </p>

<p>Imaginative persons are commonly re- 
proached with gazing at the stars and over- 
looking the road at their feet. Here, by a 
singular reversal, was a man incapable of 
imagination, whose life was in the work of 
his hands, who saw nothing but mounds of 
chalk and pieces of timber where there were 
woods and hills, and yet he was more under 
the influence of a distant and unattainable 
object than the most veritable dreamer. </p>

<p>Each year as Felise grew, so grew his con- 
viction that she was not for him. He held 

</p>

 </p>

<p>this question up close to his mind (closer and 
closer as he became mentally shorter of sight) 
and observed with more vivid perception her 
perfection and beauty. </p>

<p>This concentration in time produced a 
reflex action* He could not have her — ^he 
was ready, like a tiger, to tear to pieces, any- 
thing or anyone she preferred, to oppose 
her, to cross her, and almost injure her. </p>

<p>As a lover he should, in accordance with </p>

<p>all precedent, have sought to gratify her and </p>

<p>render himself pleasant. By simple courtesy 
towards Mr. Goring he could have seen her </p>

<p>continually, and had every opportunity of </p>

<p>influencing her mind in his favour. On the </p>

<p>contrary, he never omitted an opportunity of </p>

<p>annoying Mr. Goring; he quarrelled with </p>

<p>him about fences, attempted to cut off the </p>

<p>supply of water to the trout-pond, and made </p>

<p>himself disagreeable in every petty way pos* </p>

<p>sible. </p>

<p>His notice to Abner's parents was intended </p>

<p>as a sidelong thrust at Mr. Goring, who em^ 

</p>



<p>ployed the young man as his assistant. He 
saw Felise fishing (or rather making a pre- 
tence of fishing) down the stream, and seized 
the opportunity of raking up an old dispute 
as to the right of taking trout, with the more 
eagerness because it afforded him a chance 
of personally abusing her uncle face to 
face. </p>

<p>There could scarcely have been a more 
remarkable instance of the reversal of the 
normal condition of the mind caused by 
suppressed passion. A lover would at least 
have said nothing; if possible he would 
have contrived means to enable her to enjoy 
fishing in the best reaches of the stream. 
Robert Godwin, whose mind was wholly 
occupied by Felise, fell into a fury, and 
denounced and threatened Mr. Goring in 
unmeasured terms. </p>

<p>The latter regarded him with something 
like curiosity instead of turning him out of 
doors. Another reason Mr. Goring did not 
wish to break off amenities with the steward 

</p>

<p>2S6 THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>was because he was the steward whom he 
had fought so often on public grounds. 
Now, if you personally quarrel with your 
enemy and order him off your premises, you 
lose half the value of your victory over him. 
He becomes distant — no longer a man, but a 
mere figure. Mr. Goring opposed Robert 
Godwin, yet his house was at any time open 
to him as a neighbour. Nor, indeed, did 
Mr. Goring feel any vindictiveness against 
him; he looked upon him as a study. </p>

<p>While Robert Godwin was storming about 
Felise, in his heart he was abstracted from 
himself with hopeless love. </p>

<p>This reflex action of the mind led him to 
oppose the very creature who could have 
commanded his life. Such cases occasionally 
occur where parents who have doted upon 
their children destroy them in an hour of 
temporary distress lest those they loved so 
much should suffer. Something of this 
reflex action may be found in the suicide 
who sets a value upon the good things of the 

</p>

 2 si 

</p>

<p>world — upon money, power, place, credit — a 
value so high, as they are at the moment 
beyond his reach, that he determines to 
extinguish himself in order that he may 
never possess them. A backward, reflex 
action of the mind is often dangerous to 
mental equilibrium. </p>

<p>Never before had Robert Godwin stood 
so near the woman who had his whole 
existence in her hands as at the moment 
when she was stroking Ruy and inquiring 
how he became possessed of the horse. Her 
presence, the touch of her dress, the faint 
warmth of her breath — he felt her; it was 
almost an embrace. He had kept himself 
so much at a distance that the accidental 
touch of her dress was a caress. Having no 
imagination his love was not a sentiment; it 
was a reality of life, like the blood in his 
veins. </p>

<p>Ancient philosophers had a theory that 
the vital spirits were dispersed about the 
body, and flowed through it as the blood </p>

<p>VOL. I. 17 

</p>

<p>2s8 THE DEWY MORN. 

</p>

<p>flowed. Perhaps there really is a germ of 
truth in this old idea; possibly there is a 
circulation — a current of the electricity of life 
throughout the nerves. At that moment this 
current stopped in Robert Godwin — his life 
stood still; his concentration, his abstraction 
was so intense that he was in a manner dead. 
His nervous force was withdrawn from his 
limbs and frame, and concentrated upon 
her. </p>

<p>He was not conscious of hearing what she 
asked him, although he answered correctly. 
He had no idea how he left, or how he came 
to be riding along the road. His duties for 
the rest of the day were performed in a 
faultless manner — nothing omitted, nothing 
slurred; down to the last item everything 
was entered by the light of the candle on the 
cobwebbed washstand. But the dial of time 
had stood still for Robert Godwin. He did 
not know if it were day or night. ^^ ^ </p>

<p>She had promised to come over to his 
house on the morrow. 

</p>



<p>Her dress had touched him; her breath 
had reached his cheek. </p>

<p>She was coming to-morrow — after nine 
years she was coming to-morrow ! Only to 
see a horse; but she was coming — she would 
stand by him again. </p>

<p>There was no sentiment in this feeling; it 
was a matter of reality. </p>

<p>He might again feel her breath; he might 
hear her dress rustle beside him. He would 
again meet the gaze of the deep, dreamy, 
grey eyes. </p>

<p>Yet it was not Felise; it was Robert 
Godwin all the time. His feelings were of 
himself; concentration became ten times 
more concentrated. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin did not inquire into the 
possibilities of the incident; but, despite his 
self-depreciation and conviction that he could 
never be anything to her, hope sprang in his 
secret heart. </p>

<p>V </p>

<p>Great indeed is the commotion hope arouses 
when it has been absent many years. Nine </p>

<p>17 — 2 

</p>

<p>26o THE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>years had passed without hope — now hope 
returned. </p>

<p>The man could not rest He worked with 
his hands the night through. He mended 
the gate; he arranged the ancient lumber in 
the attic; he was out to the carters at sunrise, 
relieved to have some one to drive. </p>

<p>Hope ! This was why he could not rest — 
why he dug by the light of the lantern in the 
garden, as if searching for hidden treasure at 
midnight. </p>

<p>Felise, uneasy about Martial, had not 
ceased to think of Ruy; Martial must really 
be in difficulties to part with him. Her 
passion was completed by this thought. In 
real affection, if the loved one is in trouble, 
oil is poured upon the flame. </p>

<p>Mr. Goring could not tell her anything 
about Bernard's difficulties. He knew in a 
general way that he was not wealthy, and 
that was all. Abner, the gardener, brought 
in all the gossip of the village, but had 
not mentioned this. 

</p>

 261 

</p>

<p>Felise questioned Mary Shaw — these 
village girls are such terrible gossips; but 
Shaw knew nothing, except that Mr. Bar- 
nard was very good-looking. The hussy 
did not add that once or twice lately she 
had had some conversation with that young 
gentleman. She omitted, too, to say that 
he had crossed her plump hand with a piece 
of silver, in gipsy style, for telling him 
secrets; also that she had received a kiss 
with equanimity in the dusk of a summer 
evening. </p>

<p>Felise was still dwelling upon Martial's 
trouble, when in the morning she took half a 
dozen apples from the storeroom, and started 
over to see Ruy. Mr. Goring was choice in 
apples. His trees were famous; he had all 
kinds, some that would keep till the autumn 
came twice. </p>

<p>As she went out Felise noticed several 
women of the hamlet standing in a group in 
the private roadway, each carrying a bucket. 
They were talking and gesticulating; they 

</p>

<p>262 THE DEIVY MORN. </p>

<p>curtsied, but Felise did not stay to talk with 
them. </p>

<p>Farther along the path she met four or 
five more, also carrying buckets; one of 
these being Sbaw*s mother, presumed upon 
that connection to stand in front of Felise, 
and b^n abusing Mr. Robert Godwin. </p>

<p>What ¥ras the matter now ? asked Felise, 
full of her own thoughts and not in the mood 
to listen to grievances. </p>

<p>Matter enough — Godwin had railed in and 
padlocked the hamlet spring, and they could 
not get at it. True, the stream ran past the 
hamlet, but it was very shallow; and, till a 
dipping-place was constructed, it was not 
easy to get water from it unless they went 
half a mile to the first pool. Half a mile is 
a long way to stagger under a yoke in hot 
summer weather. </p>

<p>The railings round the spring had been 
in process of erection for a fortnight; they 
were high, and not to be climbed. But the 
carpenters were either in ignorance them- 

</p>



<p>selves, or had been bribed to conceal the 
truth, for it had been given out that these 
railings were only erected to prevent cattle 
from soiling the pure water. There would 
be a wicket-gate for the folk. </p>

<p>At the last moment, instead of a gate the 
opening was nailed up, and the spring 
completely enclosed. A placard was posted 
announcing that the spring was private, and 
warning all whom it might concern that 
damage to the fencing would be visited with 
the utmost rigour of the law — Mr. Robert 
Godwin's latest movement in the interest of 
his employer. If usage was established, the 
property might suffer at some future time. </p>

<p>Like a flock of sheep who cannot get 
through a gateway, the village women 
crowded round outside the high railings 
through which they could see the spring, set 
down their buckets, and fell to abuse. </p>

<p>By-and-by a man came along; and, after 
deliberately inspecting the railings, shaking 
them to see if they were sound, and spelling 

</p>

<p>tirccjgh cbe piacand. he ^vis©i dbem to go 
10. Mr. Garag— dbe giecjeriir refijge in diffi- </p>

<p>Avav tbev 2il!l wieinit aoooirdiiiit:^ to Mr. 
Gdria^. ni&o at antce threw open his gates, 
and told all to help themselves finom the 
pump, which was supplied with good water 
from the same source as the ^>ring. </p>

<p>He then put on his coat, being usually in 
his snowy shirt-deeves in summer, had the 
pony harnessed, and drove away into the 
town to consult with his lawyer as to the 
legality of this encroachment. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin's real object in enclosing 
the spring was known only to himself — it 
was to spite and annoy Felise's nearest 
friend. The path to the spring was so short 
it could scarcely be said to trespass on the 
Squire's property — that was only the pre- 
tence. Well he knew that nothing would so 
cxcitC! Mr. Goring's indignation as so wanton 
a pi(!ce of tyranny. That Goring would at 
once take an axe and proceed to hew down 

</p>



<p>the railings was what he fully hoped and ex- 
pected. Such an act would involve Felise's 
friend in endless litigation — such was the trap 
he had set. </p>

<p>But Mr. Goring did not fall into it. A 
man of a reflective mind, he had heard of 
these posts and railings, and soon began to 
question the motive alleged for their erection. 
Measures for the convenience and good of 
others, like protecting water from contamina- 
tion, were not in accordance with the recent 
history of the Cornleigh estate. He suspected 
what afterwards happened. His indignation 
was none the less; but he was cool, and he 
did not seize his axe and rush to destroy the 
obstruction. It was best to go about the 
work calmly and legally; even with a good 
cause, and right on our side, violence often 
recoils upon the striker. </p>

<p>Martial — Martial — the thought of Martial 
compelled Felise to shut her eyes to these 
things. If Robert Godwin had been the 
cruellest tyrant since the world began, she 

</p>

 </p>

<p>must have gone that morning to see Martial's 
horse, and if possible to learn more about his 
former owner. 

* I want to see your horse again/ said 
Felise, almost immediately she arrived. </p>

<p>Robert led Ruy out for her inspection down 
to the garden, where his hoofs trampled the 
sward of the path. 



</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2> </p>

<p>3ELISE gave Ruy an apple, and 
then another till the six were 
gone. He thrust his nostrils into 
her hand, and pushed her with his face for 
more. As he moved it brought Robert, who 
held him, close to Felise. Once again he 
felt the caress of her dress, even the touch of 
her arm. </p>

<p>The contrast between them was very 
marked. Her clear complexion, her golden 
hair; her form so beautifully shaped that 
even the loveliness of her face was over- 
looked. You must forget her form before 
you could see her features. </p>

<p>His black countenance — black like a piece 

</p>

 </p>

<p>of wood that has lain for years in the rain; 
his colourless eye; his round stout frame ex- 
pressive of ungraceful strength. </p>

<p>But Ruy, greedy for more apples, would 
not stand still. Robert lost the touch of her 
arm, and the caress of her dress. 

* He is a fine horse,' said Felise; ' I can- 
not understand why his owner sold him. 
Did you not say he wanted money T 

* His rent was overdue,' said Robert. At 
ordinary times he would not have let this 
out; at the moment he was abstracted from 
himself to such a degree that his lips an- 
swered without the consent of his mind. 
* His Lady Day rent was overdue — and — 
and I bought the horse.' 

* That he might have the money to pay.' 
*Yes.' 

* And the price was ?' 
' Sixty pounds.' 

* I thought you said seventy yesterday.' 

' No— did I r </p>

<p>The horse-dealer's instinct had for the 

</p>



<p>time deserted him. He forgot to add ten 
pounds to the sum he had really given. 

* Is he very much in difficulty ?^ asked 
Felise, growing bolder. 

* I am not sure ' (this was the truth); ' I 
should like to know.* </p>

<p>Felise was obliged to move, as Ruy worked 
his face too forcibly against her. She walked 
with Robert towards the stables, thinking if 
there was any other leading question she 
could put. She could not think of another. 

* Now may I ask you a favour ?* said 
Felise, as Robert, having handed Ruy over 
to the charge of a carter, was returning with 
her towards the house. 

'Certainly.* 

* Will you not let old Abner Brown stay in 
his cottage ? He cannot live very much 
longer.* </p>

<p>Robert*s mental condition stiffened in- 
stantly. The request brought him back 
from the glamour into which he had been 
thrown. 

</p>

<p>12 70 THE DEWY MORN. 

' He has already been there much longer 
than he ought/ he said. * I believe it is a 
year since he ceased to work.* 

' Yes — think; he worked up to within one 
year of eighty-four — surely that should plead 
for him.' 

* I have to consider the estate/ said 
Robert. ' You know the circumstances — he 
cannot do any work, nor can his wife; we 
want the cottage for those who can.* 

* But has he not earned a little repose, Mr. 
Godwin ?* 

' He can have it in the workhouse/ 

' Do not say so — do not mention that </p>

<p>dreadful place. It would kill the old man to </p>

<p>leave his garden.' 

* They will let him sweep up the leaves 
and weed the paths at the workhouse.' 

* He is very, very old, Mr. Godwin; he 
has lived in that cottage more than forty 
years, and all the trees in the garden are 
his own planting — there are apples, and a 
cherry ' 

</p>

 271 

* We want the cottage — we must have it; 
I know several who will be glad of it/ 

* They are no expense/ continued Felise, 

* because their son keeps them; let them 
stay/ 

* It is impossible ! as for young Abner, he 
ought not to live in our cottage and work off 
the estate/ 

' He works for Mr. Goring/ said Felise, 
beginning to grow angry; but she checked it 
for the sake of the aged couple. * Mr. God- 
win, I will pay you — what is the rent of the 
cottage ?' 

* Two shillings a week.' 

* I will pay it, then you will lose nothing/ 

* The rent is paid now,* said Godwin. 

* You misunderstand; we lose the man's 
work who should live there.' 

* Oh, but they are so old 1' 

* There is the workhouse.* 

' They will never go there.' 

* They must; the parish will not allow out- 
door relief.' 

</p>

 

' Mr. Godwin, do let them stay; I have 
set my heart upon it/ </p>

<p>Who else could have resisted her ? The 
argument and the trace of anger which had 
begun to rise had brightened her colour and 
warmed her whole appearance. Robert re- 
fused her point-blank. The stored-up passion 
of so many years, causing an irresistible re- 
flex action, forced him to oppose her. After 
this appeal from her, now he knew she 
wished it, had a sign shone in the heavens 
still he would not have yielded. </p>

<p>Felise, recognising his stubborn mood, 
forbore to press further; she spoke for 
a few minutes with Miss Godwin, and 
left. </p>

<p>In the afternoon Mr. Goring came home, 
having consulted his solicitor, who thought 
that probably there was a right to enclose the 
spring, as it was on private property, though 
within a few yards of the highway. The 
question would be an awkward one; it might 
cost hundreds of pounds to decide it; he 

</p>

 273 

</p>

<p>advised his client to have nothing to do 
with it. 

• This is indeed a right !* said Mr. Goring 
* Time it is that such ** rights" should be 
abolished — the word itself is reversed in 
alluding to them. Has any man a ** right," 
then, to enclose the air, the light ? Doubt- 
less, if it could be done, there are those who 
would enclose the ocean and claim it as 
private property.' </p>

<p>He set out that very evening with Abner 
to construct a dipping-place in a part of the 
stream that passed through his little property, 
intending also to open a footpath to it for the 
use of the inhabitants. </p>

<p>Felise inquired if he had heard anything 
in Maasbury about Mr. Barnard's alleged 
pecuniary difficulties. 

' No,* said Goring. ' Why do you wish to 
know ?' 

' There seems so much trouble about us,' 
replied Felise discreetly. * So many farmers 
failing — that is all. </p>

<p>VOL. I. 18 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>Nor had Mary Shaw discovered anything. </p>

<p>Felise turned over Miss Barnard's Dante 
scrap-book, wishing the owner would come 
for it. </p>

<p>Next morning she went over again to God- 
win's, fed Ruy with apples, petted him and 
praised him, talked a little whjle with Robert, 
and begged for old Abner's cottage. In 
vain. </p>

<p>Four times in succession she visited Ruy, 
fed him, petted him, stroked him, and seemed 
more and more loth to leave him. </p>

<p>The fifth morning she did not come; 
Robert waited and worked with his hands, 
but she did not come. This was the Satur- 
day; Sunday he did not think it at all likely 
she would come. He never slept, nor even 
attempted to do so on the Saturday or Sun- 
day night. How he passed them it is diffi- 
cult to tell, but he constantly moved some- 
thing or other about with his hands. Two 
nights without sleep did not leave much trace 
on his bronze face; but his heart's bitterness 

</p>



<p>was worn deeper within him, as a storm 
wears gullies in the rock. </p>

<p>Already, so swift is gossip, the hamlet had 
begun to talk of Miss Goring and Mr. God- 
win. Though Felise had helped them in so 
many ways, though her uncle was actually at 
that moment working for them, they could 
not say a good word, they could not credit 
her with any motive but greed of money. 

* She be a-looking after old Godwin's 
gold.' 'Selling herself to the old miser.' 
* Hope his money will choke her.* * Never 
thought there was much in her, did you ?' </p>

<p>Such was the tone of their comments. </p>

<p>Felise was disappointed; Miss Barnard 
had not called for the Dante scrap-book; 
after her bold effort she seemed no nearer 
her object. But an idea had been gradually 
forming itself in her mind, and on Monday 
she started, always impetuous, to put it into 
practice. </p>

<p>She went over and fed Ruy once more 
with apples, Ruy was as greedy of them as </p>

<p>18—2 

</p>



<p>a miser of coin; she talked with Robert, and 
presently asked him for how much he would 
sell the horse ? 

* Seventy pounds/ said Robert. 

* But you only gave sixty for him/ 

* I have to make my turn — my profit,' said 
Robert. 

* Will you sell him to me ?' 

* Of course.' 

* I will buy him,' said Felise. 

* You shall have him — seventy pounds.' 

* Sixty.* 

< No— no.' 

* Sixty-five.' 

' Impossible.' 

* Sixty-seven.' 

* I couldn't.' 

* Sixty-seven — that is seven pounds profit, 
and all in a few days,' said Felise. 

* Seventy pounds,' said Robert decidedly, 
and Felise saw that it was no use to bar- 
gain. 

* Very well, seventy — I will bring you the 

</p>



<p>money this evening; you will not part with 
him to anyone else in the meantime ?' 

* Why, no — certainly not.* 

* I will come then, this evening/ </p>

<p>She returned home, and asked Mr. Goring 
for the pony-carriage to drive into the town; 
it was prepared, and she started alone. </p>

<p>So soon as she had left, Robert Godwin 
said to himself that he had been foolish to 
part with the horse so easily. She had so 
set her mind on the horse, he might have 
asked ninety safely. If he had kept him till 
the hunting-season some gentleman might 
have taken a fancy for him and gone still 
higher, perhaps a hundred and twenty. For 
the price of a horse is the price of a fancy, 
and goes up like stocks and shares when 
buyers are in the vein. Why, very likely 
she knew of some one who would give her 
ninety or a hundred for such a horse; very 
likely that was the secret of her eager- 
ness to secure him. Robert felt that he had 
been ' had;* it hurt his semi-professional 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>pride as a horse-dealer now and then, 
generally heavily to his gain. </p>

<p>The miser and the lover — despair, hope, 
and anger — were they not strangely mingled 
in this man ? </p>

<p>A passionate lover would have given his 
lady the horse in a moment, especially if as 
rich as Robert Godwin. With all his riches, 
and his secret passion, he had but once 
given her a present. One fair-day — eight 
years since — for a marvel he spent fourpence 
(the groat is still a unit in country places) at 
a stall on * fairings,' a sort of sweet biscuit, 
thinking he might see her as he came home. 
He did see her, and gave her the groat's 
worth of * fairings;* the child took them 
silently, not without some awe of his black 
face. </p>

<p>He had cleared ten pounds profit, and he 
was torturing himself because he feared he 
had missed an opportunity to make twenty. </p>

<p>Yet his hands were never still because 
of his unmanageable passion — he must work 

</p>



<p>with them constantly; his heart's bitterness 
was full to overflowing because he could not 
have her; the hope her presence gave was 
like a sword splitting his very heart in two. 
She stood by him and his lips were dumb — 
commonplaces are dumbness — his lips were 
closed with iron-bolts; he could not say one ' 
word to indicate his meaning, to seek her 
favour. </p>

<p>Are we cynical moderns right, after all, in 
our discredit of Fate ? Could there possibly 
be some fate here, some of that irresistible 
destiny which in Sophocles carries its tyrant 
will through generation after generation ? 
Petty circumstances unregarded lead men on, 
from step to step, from thought to thought, 
action to action; is this Fate ? </p>

<p>The greed of the miser; the agony of the 
lover who knows that he cannot be loved; 
the pitiless animosity of the tyrant turning by 
■ reflex action against the creature of his love; 
the sharp sword of a hope that only shows 
what might be zf — these are terrible goads. 

</p>

<p>1 
</p>

<p>fe,WfN!«W#»j| 
</p>

<p>M 
</p>

<p>i>w,«w».««'i 
</p>

<p>g 

</p>

<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h2> </p>

<p>lURRYING into the town as fast 
as her pony could take her, Felise 
was in deep anxiety, for she had 
bought the horse without the money to pay 
for him. She was so fearful lest Godwin 
should sell to some one else, lest Ruy should 
be sent away to some market at a distance 
and disappear, that she bid for him before 
she had made arrangements to obtain the 
money. </p>

<p>When she was brought a child to Mr. 
Goring, her fortune consisted of some fifty " 
pounds and a set of pearls. Of the fifty 
pounds Goring had been obliged to spend 

</p>



<p>four from time to time on necessities for his 
charge. At sixteen, he placed the remainder 
in a private savings-bank for her, and gave 
her the pass-book. Since then she had 
drawn four more; there were consequently 
forty-two pounds remaining. The value of 
the pearls was one hundred and fifty, so 
they had been estimated; in fact, they had 
originally cost more. If only she could find 
some one to advance her twenty-eight 
pounds on these pearls, she could complete 
her purchase. She feared the difficulty 
arising from her sex, and from the fact that 
she was not yet of age. </p>

<p>She had no choice of persons, for there 
was but one to whom she could apply — a 
silversmith who was known to be wealthy. 
He hopped a little, or halted in some way in 
his gait; after advancing a step he paused, 
and drew his other foot up level in a sort of 
plaintive style, as much as to say, * I should 
indeed be a man if it were not for this in- 
firmity.* This deliberative motion, extending 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>into his ideas, had enabled him to accumulate 
a considerable fortune. </p>

<p>Now the silversmith had always shown a 
kind of friendship for Mr. Goring, inviting 
him into his private room if the latter brought 
his watch to be repaired, and now and then 
calling at BeechknoU as he drove past to 
regulate some one's clock. Secretly he gave 
Mr. Goring to understand that, although his 
business position forbade him to openly take 
any part, their views really coincided. He 
looked on the Cornleigh family as an incubus, 
and their ways as despotic. </p>

<p>At heart he owned he was a radical, though 
Mrs. Cornleigh herself sometimes called at 
the shop if she wanted a pin put in a brooch, 
or some similar trifle; for all their silver and 
electro * the family * went to London, and 
never spent a pound in the town. </p>

<p>The fact was the silversmith, halting at 
every step and considering, had noticed that 
Mr. Goring's little property lay like a wedge 
between two sections of the Cornleigh estate. 

</p>



<p>The little property was so small he thought 
Goring could never live on it long without 
borrowing money, and who should he go to 
for a loan but his friend the silversmith ? </p>

<p>Loans mount up; in time, Goring would 
have to part with the place at a low price — 
the silversmith's price; then, once in posses- 
sion, the silversmith could re-sell to the 
Cornleighs at a great advance — perhaps 
double, for it was well known to him that 
the Squire, or the Squire's agent, Robert 
Godwin, had fixed his heart on this fragment 
of land to round off the estate. </p>

<p>The silversmith dwelt much in secret upon 
this idea, for it promised in one coup to give 
him more than he could make in ten years' 
sale of the goods in his shop-window. More 
than once he had hinted at an advance; but 
Goring either had not understood him, or 
purposely turned the subject. The years 
were rolling on; the silversmith's hair was as 
white now as the frosted silver in his cases, 
and his ingenious scheme had not visibly 

</p>

<p>284 1'HE DEWY MORN. </p>

<p>progressed a jot. With increasing age he 
drew his lame foot forward with a slower and 
more pathetic limp, and waited. By-and-by 
it would happen. To this man Felise was 
hastening with her pearls. </p>

<p>As she drove into the precincts of the 
town, she glanced at a fine display of flowers 
in the bow- window of a private residence. 
The flowers suggested unusual skill in selec- 
tion, and unlimited care. Felise saw the 
blue, and yellow, and scarlet of the flowers, 
but did not observe the face behind them. </p>

<p>It was the face of Rosa Wood. The 
merchant's daughter, in her unhappiness, had 
taken to passing much of her time at this 
window, which commanded a view of the 
street, to enjoy the poor pleasure — if pleasure 
it was — of seeing Martial pass at rare in- 
tervals. Unless upon some necessary busi- 
ness he never entered the town, the very 
name of which was now distasteful to him. </p>

<p>But, as she had no other means of seeing 
him, Rosa kept a constant watch at the 

</p>



<p>window, or in the garden in front of it; and, 
lest people should notice her being there so 
much, and to while away the time, she oc- 
cupied herself with flowers. It was not so 
sad as the story of the pot of basil, and yet 
there was a dead hope concealed under the 
coloured petals so sedulously tended. Flowers 
so often screen unhappiness. </p>

<p>For many days Rosa had endeavoured to 
discover for whom Martial had deserted 
her; a woman herself, she never doubted 
but that his conduct was due to some 
other woman. A woman always blames a 
woman. </p>

<p>Some one obtained a reputation for astute- 
ness by remarking when he heard of mischief, 
* Who is the woman ?' Instead of which he 
thereby proved the inferiority of the masculine 
intellect, since it required great talent to point 
out a clue which has always been obvious to 
the feminine mind. Let a man be, in fact, 
never so innocent — let him be really at his 
club, or in Paris on business, or gone to see 

</p>

 </p>

<p>a fellow about a dog — his wife, or his Jianc^ey 
is sure to suspect a woman. </p>

<p>Rosa could not find the woman. Though 
she no longer visited at the Manor House, 
the Misses Barnard called upon her just the 
same as during their brother's engagement; 
but these ladies, too, were at fault. Three 
of them together could not find out the other 
woman. </p>

<p>That afternoon however, at the sound of 
wheels, Rosa looked up, saw Felise, and said 
to herself instantly, * There she is.' </p>

<p>It is impossible for me to explain how she 
arrived at this conclusion, for no one but a 
woman could experience such intuition. </p>

<p>Rosa turned pale, then she started up; her 
knees failed her, and she sat down again. 
But the next moment she recovered herself, 
and hastened, still trembling, into the garden; 
whence, behind the shrubs, she c.ould see 
where the pony-carriage stopped. It stopped 
about midway up the street; she could not 
distinguish the shop. She called a man who 

</p>



<p>worked in the garden, and despatched him to 
find out to whom the pony-carriage belonged. 
He returned in a few minutes, having recog- 
nised it as Mr. Goring's. </p>

<p>Miss Goring, then, was the other woman. </p>

<p>Felise never attended the concerts, balls, 
or amusements which were given in Maas- 
bury, nor did Mr. Goring ever enter the 
place except on business. Consequently 
Rosa had not remembered this family when 
she ran over, time after time, all the families 
of the neighbourhood, and checked them on 
her fingers. </p>

<p>Although the Manor House was no great 
distance from Maasbury, there was a range 
of downs between, and the people of the two 
places seemed to belong to different provinces, 
having so little intercourse. Everything is 
very local in the country. The Misses 
Barnard had scarcely heard of Felise, even 
by name, till that day when, overcome by 
fatigue, she walked up to the front-door. </p>

<p>But without doubt this was the woman. 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>Her face burning, her hands cold, her 
heart throbbing, Rosa returned to the window 
and waited to catch another view of her rival 
as she left the town. </p>

<p>Felise drove straight to the silversmith^s 
door, and was received with beaming polite- 
ness. The old gentleman really possessed a 
certain air of fashion, an impressive, magni- 
ficent kind of courtesy — there was a style in 
the very way he placed a chair for his visitor. 
His frosted hair, his faultless dress, his ex- 
quisite limp and plaintive expression were far 
above the stage on which he played his part. 
Felise was shown into the private room 
behind the counter — a room elegantly fur- 
nished — before she could utter a word on 
business. </p>

<p>The silversmith's expectations were high. 

*At last,* he thought, *she has come to 
open negotiations — to prepare the way; just 
as I expected. Now for the loan !' </p>

<p>At this moment Felise produced a casket 
from her bag, and placed it on the table. 

</p>



<p>The silversmith's heart fell; it was not the 
loan then, only some trifling repairs. </p>

<p>But at the sight of the pearls which she 
drew forth and placed upon the table, the eye 
of the old usurer (for such, in fact, he was) 
glistened again. Felise went to the point at 
once, and asked him to advance upon them 
as much money as he could. Here by her 
inexperience she committed a mistake by 
leaving him to fix the amount; she should 
have fixed it herself, and as high as possible. 
Felise was happily ignorant of the craft and 
subtility of the world. </p>

<p>Humming and hawing as he handled the 
pearls, the silversmith raised his eyebrows in 
his most plaintive and deprecatory manner, 
and regretted that it would not be possible 
to advance much upon them. Pearls had 
dropped, pearls were not nearly so valuable; 
another pearl-fishery had just been dis- 
covered; there were large stocks now that 
could not be sold, and so forth. 

' But they are worth a hundred and fifty </p>

<p>VOL. I. 19 

</p>

 </p>

<p>pounds/ said Felise, beginning to feel very 
miserable. * Tell me now how much you 
can lend me/ 

' Well/ said the silversmith, very, very 
deliberately, * it is unpleasant — it is hard to 
refuse; but really, Miss Goring, as a matter of 
business I don't think I could advance any- 
thing/ 

* Nothing !' said Felise, in blank despair. 
'Not in the way of business,' said the </p>

<p>silversmith, in the most caressing tones of a 
naturally low voice. * But still with a friend 
it is different' </p>

<p>Felise began to sit very upright in her 
chair; she had a sense of insult, as if she was 
being put under an obligation. 

* And for you or Mr. Goring's convenience,' 
he continued, * of course I shall be most happy 
if you will permit me, as a favour to me, to 
advance a small sum upon them.' </p>

<p>Felise sank back again in her chair; he 
had put it the other way, as if he should be 
under an obligation to her. 

</p>

 291 

* I should be very glad/ she said. * And 
how much ?' 

* Would now, let me see — ten pounds * 

' Oh dear no T cried Felise. ' Not nearly 
enough.* 

* Fifteen pounds ' 

' I want twice as much/ said Felise hastily, 
' I want thirty pounds — I mean I want 
twenty-eight pounds, if you please/ </p>

<p>This was another mistake; twenty-eight 
pounds, he saw at once, was the sum she 
would be satisfied with. </p>

<p>He paused and seemed to weigh the 
matter in his mind. 

' Does Mr. Goring — excuse me — does Mr. 
Goring know you are bringing me these 
pearls ?* he asked. 

* No — no — that is — but they are mine, 
quite mine. They were my mother's; I can 
do as I like with them.' 

* And, pardon me again, are you of age ?' 
Felise's heart fell as she faltered a negative. 

' I am obliged to make these inquiries/ 

» </p>

<p>19 — 2 

</p>

 </p>

<p>said the silversmith; ' you must really pardon 
me. Under the circumstances, I think we 
had better let this be a purely friendly trans- 
action, without any formal record. If I am 
willing to trust you with my money on your 
word that these are your pearls, will you trust 
them to me }' 

' Of course I will — of course I will trust 
them to you.' 

' Then there need be no writing at all; I 
will give you the twenty-eight pounds; you 
shall yourself put the pearls in my safe, and 
there they will remain. In six months* time 
you will repay me the twenty-eight pounds 
with five per cent, interest, and I will restore 
you the pearls. Will that do ?* 

* Yes,' said Felise, though at the same time 
it occurred to her that there was no prospect 
whatever of her possessing the money at that 
date. </p>

<p>The silversmith had considered within 
himself that this transaction was one of those 
which could not be made valid by any in- 

</p>



<p>genuity of terms. He looked for his profit 
in the influence he should possess with Miss 
Goring, who would forward his views if the 
little scheme alluded to came to be realised; 
he protected himself and would escape ob- 
loquy, if the transaction became known, by 
charging a merely nominal interest (for 
usurers); he further protected himself be- 
cause there was not a scrap of writing to 
show that he had ever had the pearls. He 
felt certain they were worth fully two 
hundred pounds. </p>

<p>With her own hands Felise placed the 
casket in the safe, as if permission to 
personally deposit them was a guarantee of 
good faith on behalf of the receiver, and 
twenty-eight sovereigns were counted down 
on the table. The usurer in his most 
courtier-like manner took her to her pony- 
carriage, gave her the reins, and bowed in 
good style as she drove off. </p>

<p>Round the corner of the street Felise 
stopped at the private savings bank; she 
was barely in time; in fact, the hour for 
closing had struck, and to an ordinary cus- 
tomer it would have been too late. Felise's 
presence seemed to fill the dingy room with 
so unusual a light that the cashier, dumb 
and nervous, hurried to carry out her wishes. 
Forty pounds were paid to her in notes, two 
pounds in gold; this made up the seventy 
pounds for Ruy. The pony-carriage went 
rattling down the street; Felise was happy, 
she had succeeded. Had the pearls been 
worth a thousand pounds, she would have 
left them for the twenty-eight. </p>

<p>For the craft and subtility of this w^orld 
are too deep for most of us. For instance, 
who would suspect an oyster of deceit ? Yet 
the other afternoon, while looking at some 
red mullet in a fishmonger s shop — red mullet 
are very nice, if you can persuade the cook 
to split them and remove the bitter substance 
which generally spoils them; you must have 
this done most carefully — while I was look- 
ing at the red mullet and feeling the 
slenderness of my purse, and thinking of 
Lucullus and Trimalchio's banquet, and how- 
red mullet really are very good — in short, 
while temptation trod on the heels of pru- 
dence, in steps an important old gentleman. </p>

<p>He had an air of wrath and ire; a rich, 
nervous, irritable, insist-upon-my-rights sort 
of personage; a gold-mounted eye-glass 
swung on his chest one moment, and was up 
at his eye the next; his Java cane came 
down thump on the sanded floor; a man no 
fishmonger dared baulk of his whim. 

* Oysters,' he said. </p>

<p>The fishmonger bowed, rubbed his hands, 
quite shone with obsequiousness. 

* Natives,* continued the old gentleman. 
* Two dozen, and mind, they are to be opened 
at my door' 

' Certainly, sir; with pleasure, sir. Any- 
thing else, sir; fine turbot, sir — ah — ^hum !' </p>

<p>The old gentleman had gone down the street. 

' Don t see how it*s to be done/ said a 
shop-assistant. 
