<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-24" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XXIV</h2> </p>


then another till the six were 
gone. He thrust his nostrils into 
her hand, and pushed her with his face for 
more. As he moved it brought Robert, who 
held him, close to Felise. Once again he 
felt the caress of her dress, even the touch of 
her arm. </p>

<p>The contrast between them was very 
marked. Her clear complexion, her golden 
hair; her form so beautifully shaped that 
even the loveliness of her face was over- 
looked. You must forget her form before 
you could see her features. </p>

<p>His black countenance — black like a piece 

</p>

 </p>

<p>of wood that has lain for years in the rain; 
his colourless eye; his round stout frame ex- 
pressive of ungraceful strength. </p>

<p>But Ruy, greedy for more apples, would 
not stand still. Robert lost the touch of her 
arm, and the caress of her dress. 

' He is a fine horse,' said Felise; ' I can- 
not understand why his owner sold him. 
Did you not say he wanted money T 

' His rent was overdue,' said Robert. At 
ordinary times he would not have let this 
out; at the moment he was abstracted from 
himself to such a degree that his lips an- 
swered without the consent of his mind. 
' His Lady Day rent was overdue — and — 
and I bought the horse.' 

' That he might have the money to pay.' 
'Yes.' 

' And the price was ?' 
' Sixty pounds.' 

' I thought you said seventy yesterday.' 

' No— did I r </p>

<p>The horse-dealer's instinct had for the 

</p>



<p>time deserted him. He forgot to add ten 
pounds to the sum he had really given. 

' Is he very much in difficulty ?^ asked 
Felise, growing bolder. 

' I am not sure ' (this was the truth); ' I 
should like to know.' </p>

<p>Felise was obliged to move, as Ruy worked 
his face too forcibly against her. She walked 
with Robert towards the stables, thinking if 
there was any other leading question she 
could put. She could not think of another. 

' Now may I ask you a favour ?' said 
Felise, as Robert, having handed Ruy over 
to the charge of a carter, was returning with 
her towards the house. 

'Certainly.' 

' Will you not let old Abner Brown stay in 
his cottage ? He cannot live very much 
longer.' </p>

<p>Robert's mental condition stiffened in- 
stantly. The request brought him back 
from the glamour into which he had been 
thrown. 

</p>



' He has already been there much longer 
than he ought/ he said. ' I believe it is a 
year since he ceased to work.' 

' Yes — think; he worked up to within one 
year of eighty-four — surely that should plead 
for him.' 

' I have to consider the estate/ said 
Robert. ' You know the circumstances — he 
cannot do any work, nor can his wife; we 
want the cottage for those who can.' 

' But has he not earned a little repose, Mr. 
Godwin ?' 

' He can have it in the workhouse/ 

' Do not say so — do not mention that </p>

<p>dreadful place. It would kill the old man to </p>

<p>leave his garden.' 

' They will let him sweep up the leaves 
and weed the paths at the workhouse.' 

' He is very, very old, Mr. Godwin; he 
has lived in that cottage more than forty 
years, and all the trees in the garden are 
his own planting — there are apples, and a 
cherry ' 

</p>

 271 

' We want the cottage — we must have it; 
I know several who will be glad of it/ 

' They are no expense/ continued Felise, 

' because their son keeps them; let them 
stay/ 

' It is impossible ! as for young Abner, he 
ought not to live in our cottage and work off 
the estate/ 

' He works for Mr. Goring/ said Felise, 
beginning to grow angry; but she checked it 
for the sake of the aged couple. ' Mr. God- 
win, I will pay you — what is the rent of the 
cottage ?' 

' Two shillings a week.' 

' I will pay it, then you will lose nothing/ 

' The rent is paid now,' said Godwin. 

' You misunderstand; we lose the man's 
work who should live there.' 

' Oh, but they are so old 1' 

' There is the workhouse.' 

' They will never go there.' 

' They must; the parish will not allow out- 
door relief.' 

</p>

 

' Mr. Godwin, do let them stay; I have 
set my heart upon it/ </p>

<p>Who else could have resisted her ? The 
argument and the trace of anger which had 
begun to rise had brightened her colour and 
warmed her whole appearance. Robert re- 
fused her point-blank. The stored-up passion 
of so many years, causing an irresistible re- 
flex action, forced him to oppose her. After 
this appeal from her, now he knew she 
wished it, had a sign shone in the heavens 
still he would not have yielded. </p>

<p>Felise, recognising his stubborn mood, 
forbore to press further; she spoke for 
a few minutes with Miss Godwin, and 
left. </p>

<p>In the afternoon Mr. Goring came home, 
having consulted his solicitor, who thought 
that probably there was a right to enclose the 
spring, as it was on private property, though 
within a few yards of the highway. The 
question would be an awkward one; it might 
cost hundreds of pounds to decide it; he 

</p>

 273 

</p>

<p>advised his client to have nothing to do 
with it. 

• This is indeed a right !' said Mr. Goring 
' Time it is that such '' rights" should be 
abolished — the word itself is reversed in 
alluding to them. Has any man a '' right," 
then, to enclose the air, the light ? Doubt- 
less, if it could be done, there are those who 
would enclose the ocean and claim it as 
private property.' </p>

<p>He set out that very evening with Abner 
to construct a dipping-place in a part of the 
stream that passed through his little property, 
intending also to open a footpath to it for the 
use of the inhabitants. </p>

<p>Felise inquired if he had heard anything 
in Maasbury about Mr. Barnard's alleged 
pecuniary difficulties. 

' No,' said Goring. ' Why do you wish to 
know ?' 

' There seems so much trouble about us,' 
replied Felise discreetly. ' So many farmers 
failing — that is all. </p>

<p>VOL. I. 18 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>Nor had Mary Shaw discovered anything. </p>

<p>Felise turned over Miss Barnard's Dante 
scrap-book, wishing the owner would come 
for it. </p>

<p>Next morning she went over again to God- 
win's, fed Ruy with apples, petted him and 
praised him, talked a little whjle with Robert, 
and begged for old Abner's cottage. In 
vain. </p>

<p>Four times in succession she visited Ruy, 
fed him, petted him, stroked him, and seemed 
more and more loth to leave him. </p>

<p>The fifth morning she did not come; 
Robert waited and worked with his hands, 
but she did not come. This was the Satur- 
day; Sunday he did not think it at all likely 
she would come. He never slept, nor even 
attempted to do so on the Saturday or Sun- 
day night. How he passed them it is diffi- 
cult to tell, but he constantly moved some- 
thing or other about with his hands. Two 
nights without sleep did not leave much trace 
on his bronze face; but his heart's bitterness 

</p>



<p>was worn deeper within him, as a storm 
wears gullies in the rock. </p>

<p>Already, so swift is gossip, the hamlet had 
begun to talk of Miss Goring and Mr. God- 
win. Though Felise had helped them in so 
many ways, though her uncle was actually at 
that moment working for them, they could 
not say a good word, they could not credit 
her with any motive but greed of money. 

' She be a-looking after old Godwin's 
gold.' 'Selling herself to the old miser.' 
' Hope his money will choke her.' ' Never 
thought there was much in her, did you ?' </p>

<p>Such was the tone of their comments. </p>

<p>Felise was disappointed; Miss Barnard 
had not called for the Dante scrap-book; 
after her bold effort she seemed no nearer 
her object. But an idea had been gradually 
forming itself in her mind, and on Monday 
she started, always impetuous, to put it into 
practice. </p>

<p>She went over and fed Ruy once more 
with apples, Ruy was as greedy of them as </p>



</p>



<p>a miser of coin; she talked with Robert, and 
presently asked him for how much he would 
sell the horse ? 

' Seventy pounds/ said Robert. 

' But you only gave sixty for him/ 

' I have to make my turn — my profit,' said 
Robert. 

' Will you sell him to me ?' 

' Of course.' 

' I will buy him,' said Felise. 

' You shall have him — seventy pounds.' 

' Sixty.' 

< No— no.' 

' Sixty-five.' 

' Impossible.' 

' Sixty-seven.' 

' I couldn't.' 

' Sixty-seven — that is seven pounds profit, 
and all in a few days,' said Felise. 

' Seventy pounds,' said Robert decidedly, 
and Felise saw that it was no use to bar- 
gain. 

' Very well, seventy — I will bring you the 

</p>



<p>money this evening; you will not part with 
him to anyone else in the meantime ?' 

' Why, no — certainly not.' 

' I will come then, this evening/ </p>

<p>She returned home, and asked Mr. Goring 
for the pony-carriage to drive into the town; 
it was prepared, and she started alone. </p>

<p>So soon as she had left, Robert Godwin 
said to himself that he had been foolish to 
part with the horse so easily. She had so 
set her mind on the horse, he might have 
asked ninety safely. If he had kept him till 
the hunting-season some gentleman might 
have taken a fancy for him and gone still 
higher, perhaps a hundred and twenty. For 
the price of a horse is the price of a fancy, 
and goes up like stocks and shares when 
buyers are in the vein. Why, very likely 
she knew of some one who would give her 
ninety or a hundred for such a horse; very 
likely that was the secret of her eager- 
ness to secure him. Robert felt that he had 
been ' had;' it hurt his semi-professional 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>pride as a horse-dealer now and then, 
generally heavily to his gain. </p>

<p>The miser and the lover — despair, hope, 
and anger — were they not strangely mingled 
in this man ? </p>

<p>A passionate lover would have given his 
lady the horse in a moment, especially if as 
rich as Robert Godwin. With all his riches, 
and his secret passion, he had but once 
given her a present. One fair-day — eight 
years since — for a marvel he spent fourpence 
(the groat is still a unit in country places) at 
a stall on ' fairings,' a sort of sweet biscuit, 
thinking he might see her as he came home. 
He did see her, and gave her the groat's 
worth of ' fairings;' the child took them 
silently, not without some awe of his black 
face. </p>

<p>He had cleared ten pounds profit, and he 
was torturing himself because he feared he 
had missed an opportunity to make twenty. </p>

<p>Yet his hands were never still because 
of his unmanageable passion — he must work 

</p>



<p>with them constantly; his heart's bitterness 
was full to overflowing because he could not 
have her; the hope her presence gave was 
like a sword splitting his very heart in two. 
She stood by him and his lips were dumb — 
commonplaces are dumbness — his lips were 
closed with iron-bolts; he could not say one ' 
word to indicate his meaning, to seek her 
favour. </p>

<p>Are we cynical moderns right, after all, in 
our discredit of Fate ? Could there possibly 
be some fate here, some of that irresistible 
destiny which in Sophocles carries its tyrant 
will through generation after generation ? 
Petty circumstances unregarded lead men on, 
from step to step, from thought to thought, 
action to action; is this Fate ? </p>

<p>The greed of the miser; the agony of the 
lover who knows that he cannot be loved; 
the pitiless animosity of the tyrant turning by 
■ reflex action against the creature of his love; 
the sharp sword of a hope that only shows 
what might be zf — these are terrible goads. 

</p>


</p>

<p>fe,WfN!«W#»j| 
</p>

<p>M 
</p>

<p>i>w,«w».««'i 
</p>

<p>g 

</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
