<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XIX</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-19" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIX</h2> </p>

<p>as it best to have a strong imagina- 
tion, or to be entirely without it ? 
An imaginative mind creates 
for itself a beautiful world; but upon entering 
into practical life, at every step, first one and 
then another portion of the structure is 
shattered till the entire fabric falls to pieces. 
Dust under foot and bitterness to the taste 
are all that remain; a void heart, a hopeless 
future, a weary present. The commonplace 
crushes the ideal as a cannon-ball might a 
statue. </p>

<p>The world, therefore, has long since 
decided that the imaginative is to be avoided. 
Have nothing to do with books, pictures. 

</p>



<p>sculpture, with thought or dream. Above 
all things be practical. </p>

<p>Those who do not possess an imagination 
are clearly the gainers in this life; horses, 
carriages, money, expensive wines, or, if they 
prefer it, the solid applause of well-to-do 
folk, are given to them. The imaginative 
dream of flowers, but the practical possess a 
garden. The infinite superiority of the non- 
imaginative is established. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin had never any diffic\dty 
in choosing between these two courses — the 
imaginative and the practical — because he 
had not even imagination enough to se^ that 
there were two courses. By nature he was 
absolutely devoid of imagination. He took 
things as he saw them, and the idea of there 
being anything beyond never occurred to </p>

<p>him. </p>

<p>There were the hills visible from his win: 
dow; he knew by experience that hills were 
steep, and that a horse had to pull against 
the collar to draw him over them. The 

</p>

 </p>

<p>higher they were the thinner the soil, the 
smaller the crops, and the less rent to be 
obtained. Occasionally he glanced at them 
to see if the descending or ascending mist, 
the clearness or dimness of outline, promised 
rain or sunshine — and so much for the hills. 
This practical knowledge completed his con- 
cern in these mounds of chalk. </p>

<p>The depth of the rich blue sky, the sweep 
of the clouds, the sunrise, the colours of sun- 
set, the stars so clear seen at an altitude — 
these mere imaginative things were invisible 
to him altogether. He simply did not see 
them, any more than if a thick curtain had 
been drawn before his eyes. </p>

<p>The thoughts which flow from the contem- 
plation of the azure, the noble hope of 
sunrise, the god-like promise of the stars, 
were to him non-existent; as he could not 
see the things that suggested the thought, so 
his mind was blind to the thought itself. </p>

<p>Yet further, that scarce definable culture — 
that idea which exists in the heart and soul 

</p>



<p>independent of outward appearances — the 
sense of a beautiful inner life — so delicate a 
music was soundless to his ears. </p>

<p>The ground was solid under his feet ,- the 
sky afar off a mere translucent roof; the 
sun around ball of heat, never seen unless 
he chanced to be driving westwards towards 
sunset. He measured trees, and put a red 
mark against those to be felled, so many 
every year; they were timber — wood; they 
were hard, oak some of them; he could tell 
the cubical contents, and how many feet of 
planking they would saw up into. The shape 
of the oak, the shadow, the birds who came 
to it, all its varied associations— its dream — 
had no meaning to him. Sometimes he saw 
the sea, its green plain, from the higher 
ground; but it did not attract him to the 
shore. </p>

<p>Through the woods in spring-time his feet 
waded among pools, broad lakes of azure- 
purple, acres upon acres of blue-bells, so 
crowded they could not swing; he crushed 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the tender anemone; he passed the white 
June rose. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin never walked by the sea, 
nor gathered a flower. </p>

<p>The old books which had accumulated in 
the house of his forefathers remained upon 
the shelves untouched. Since his school- 
days, when it was compulsory, he had never 
opened any other book than the almanack. . </p>

<p>He handled cattle and sheep, he inspected 
horses, he visited men at plough, at harrow, 
at harvest, at building, at sawing, smith's 
work, every kind of labour. He attended 
markets and fairs, he drove and rode to and 
fro; he kept his accounts; he looked to 
every detail of the estate and of his own 
farm. He was always in action; when he 
returned from a long day's round, so soon as 
he alighted he walked briskly down into the 
garden to see if the gardener had fulfilled a 
full day's task. </p>

<p>Robert Godwin drove men as cattle are 
never driven. For cattle are let linger by 

</p>



<p>the roadside that they may crop the clover 
which likes to grow in trodden places; cattle 
are permitted to drink at the pond, and to 
rest in the shade of the elm-trees. The 
evening comes and they are turned into a 
field to graze, and chew the cud, and con- 
sider, as it were, till the morning. </p>

<p>No man rested that Robert Godwin could 
get at to drive. His own farm labourers, 
the men who did the estate work, the wood- 
cutters, the drain-diggers, the masons and 
smiths, the very messengers to and fro the 
Squire's house and his farm — he drove them 
all. He would waylay tjie rural postman at 
six in the morning, and bully him for not 
coming at half-past five : what business had 
he to waste time taking a draught of milk at 
the farmhouse yonder? He should be re- 
ported. Robert Godwin stood at the stile 
and shouted to the children, and threatened 
them with the stick if they did not hasten on 
to school. </p>

<p>Yet when Robert Godwin's back was 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>turned and the hedge had hidden him from 
view, the ploughman relaxed his hold on the 
stilts of his plough, and the team stayed as 
he listened to the peaceful caw of the rooks. 
But Godwin's back was never turned upon 
himself. He drove himself for ever. He 
was always up at six, often at five; from then 
till dusk he moved to and fro his own farm, 
and the estate he managed; after dusk a 
cheap candle was lit for him, and he worked 
at his accounts till bedtime. He never 
listened to the caw, caw of the rooks. </p>

<p>Reading by the open window of a sunny 
day, when the mind for a moment pauses 
from its dwelling on the page, and the glance 
goes out into the light, it is very pleasant to 
hear them — these peaceful rooks caw, caw- 
ing over to their favourite furrows. Doubt- 
less you have heard them and rested. 
Robert Godwin never heard them. </p>

<p>Incessant physical occupation was a neces- 
sity of his existence. But surely there must 
have been times when, his hands being still 

</p>



<p>and his frame reposing in the early evening, 
'between the lights/ his mind roamed in 
reverie, when fancy bore sway, when a dream 
or thought came to him ? </p>

<p>No. When his hands were still and his 
frame reposed, his mind was simply vacant, 
like that of a horse looking from his stable- 
door, or a dog by his kennel. He saw the 
wall, or the fireplace, nothing more. His 
mind was simply quiescent — vacant — like a 
mirror turned face downwards, as old country- 
folk place them on the bed in a storm of 
thunder and lightning. </p>

<p>In such a position the glass reflects 
nothing, and so when his hands were still 
Godwin's mind reflected nothing. It did 
not work within itself. Thus it was that on 
lying down at bedtime he fell instantly 
asleep, sound, undisturbed, complete, like an 
animal's. No long train of aerial fancies 
passed through his mind; that organ, like a 
muscle unemployed, fell into perfect repose. </p>

<p>This incessant work was not persevered in 

</p>

 </p>

<p>as a ' religion,' such as it is the fashion nowa- 
days to ' dignify ' toil for the benefit of those 
who own factories. Nor was it the restless 
energy of a great genius, for Godwin had no 
ambition, and to drive nails in a carpenter's 
shop would have contented him as well as to 
lead the army at Pharsalia, Nor was it 
nervous restlessness; he was quite without 
nerves. It was his nature. </p>

<p>Just as rooks fly because they are rooks, 
so Godwin worked because he was Godwin, 
worked and accumulated money, and drove 
himself, and every human being with whom 
he came into the smallest contact, and knew 
no more rest or fatigue than the old mill-wheel. </p>

<p>His forefathers had had money; it was a 
family, a hereditary trait — this faculty for 
accumulation. Robert got together more, 
and it was whispered that he had lent a 
large sum to the Squire. Certainly his will 
was law on the Cornleigh estate; it was no 
use appealing to the Squire, who merely 
referred applicants back to his steward. 

</p>

<p>THE DEWY morn: 205 </p>

<p>There could not have been a more faithful 
steward. There was not a halfpenny wasted 
on that property, not the value of a rusty 
nail. Economy, rigid control, perfect ac- 
counts; every shilling brought to the board. 
Everything organized and in order; no con- 
fusion, no uncertainty. Above all, no weak 
paltering with tenants who had had losses, 
or suffered from illness or infirmity; no feeble 
yielding to the entreaties of the widow, or 
the fatherless children, or the unfortunate. 
The same rigid rule was applied unfalteringly 
to all alike, so that there could be no 
favouritism : ' Pay or go.' </p>

<p>The steward allowed no time, consented 
to no compromise. ' Pay or go.' Three 
omnipotent words, which brought to the 
Squire's pockets an unfailing supply of gold 
twice a year. </p>

<p>Some did, indeed, say that the reputation 
thereby acquired prevented tenants with 
large capital from applying when farms were 
vacant; they would rather go farther and 

</p>



</p>

<p>have more freedom and kindliness of treat- 
ment. However that might be, for the 
present, at all events, the Godwin rule was a 
success. </p>

<p>It was thought that the succession of bad 
seasons must necessitate a relaxation of this 
iron government, but fortune sometimes 
favours the hardest natures, and in this case 
favoured Robert Godwin. By a piece of 
good luck that neighbourhood did not suffer 
so severely at first as many districts; the 
crops were below the average, but not so 
seriously; some little allowance had to be 
made, but not much; the tenants certainly 
lost money, yet they could not make out a 
sufficiently pressing case to obtain much 
reduction of rent. Of late there had been 
more serious complaint. No appreciable 
difference was caused in the Godwin govern- 
ment. </p>

<p>He was ever on the alert, just the same, 
to detect the least infringement of the strict 
letter of the agreement; ever ready with 

</p>



<p>objections if any expenditure was applied for; 
always watching for an opportunity to assert 
the authority of his master. </p>

<p>A labourer began to build a hut on waste 
ground by the wayside. Godwin had the 
materials carted away, as he had commenced 
without permission from the lord of the 
manor. A cottager had made a garden in a 
hedge, leaving enough of the fence each side 
to prevent cattle straying; he worked on the 
estate, but Godwin spied out the encroach- 
ment and had quickset thorns planted among 
the potatoes. </p>

<p>The thatched roofs of the cottages in one 
of the hamlets were rotten, and let the rain 
through; the poor inhabitants begged for 
repairs. Nothing of the sort : they could buy 
straw and repair the roofs if they wished; if 
not, the wet might drip on their beds. </p>

<p>Enclosure of the common had already 
begun when Mr. Goring came forward and 
contested the right of Cornleigh Cornleigh, 
Esq., to enclose. Godwin blustered and 

</p>



<p>thundered; letters were written on blue paper; 
but public opinion had been drawn to the 
question, emissaries from powerful societies 
appeared on the scene, and the scheme was 
let drop. </p>

<p>Some day, perhaps, Mr. Goring would 
leave. These objectors have never much 
status or stability. They are not fixed like 
great hereditary owners. The Pope is dead — 
long live the Pope ! The interests of here- 
ditar)' estates are handed on generation after 
generation, much like the will of Peter the 
Great; but objectors, such as Mr. Goring, 
usually disappear in a few years. The hand 
that repairs the embankment once withdrawn, 
the sea soon rushes in. </p>

<p>Godwin was ceaselessly on the alert to 
extend the authority of his employer. Foot- 
paths were stopped, and odd corners of waste 
ground enclosed with stone walls costing 
thrice the value of the land, in order that no 
one might 'squat' and presently assert a right 
to a few square yards of their own country. 

</p>



<p>These proceedings were by no means con- 
fined to the outlying agricultural places, 
where the well-to-do people were almost 
all tenants, and the remainder poor and 
without organization. Robert Godwin 
attacked the town with equal zest and equal 
success. The Cornleigh Cornleigh property 
included a considerable part of the town, and 
his ' rights ' extended more or less over the 
rest. </p>

<p>Except by long and costly legal process it 
was impossible to tell where those ' rights ' 
really began or ended. The steward made 
the fullest use of this uncertainty. Old by- 
ways and paths were blocked, cprners en- 
closed, possession asserted and taken, and 
not a voice was raised. The whole town was 
straitened, and a band as it were drawn tight 
about it so that it could scarce breathe. </p>

<p>The park was closed, though the inhabitants 
had used it for a hundred years as a recrea- 
tion ground, and had undoubted claims to 
roads across it. Not a voice was raised^ </p>

<p>VOL. I. 14 

</p>



<p>Old inhabitants retained a respect for ' the 
family/ and would not oppose its will. 
Tradespeople wished to enjoy its custom 
and patronage, though, as a matter of fact, 
they got neither, as ' the family ' bought all 
they required in London; still they did not 
like to shut the door in their own faces. 
There were not enough shoemakers in Maas- 
bury. </p>

<p>Long since there had been a glove in- 
dustry in the surrounding villages — an in- 
dustry at which the poor folk worked in their 
own cottages. For the most part it had dis- 
appeared, yet to this day the magistrates 
could distinguish the hamlets where it had 
once flourished by the records in their books. 
To this day half the cases brought before 
them came from these hamlets. </p>

<p>Your artisan who works at home — ^your 
cottage glovemaker, or shoemaker — is a 
terrible radical, a fearful character, a fre- 
quenter of taverns, a fisticuff fellow, and 
above all things a contemner of authority. 

</p>



<p>He will get into trouble for no other purpose 
than to show his despite of authority. His 
descendants had it in their blood, and still 
continued to exhibit the same disposition. 
But the industry had died out, and there 
were no shoemakers to speak of in Maasbury 
town. Consequently Mr. Godwin ruled as 
he chose. </p>

<p>The result was that the property was 
trimmed, walled, enclosed, and improved in 
every possible manner. Had it been set out 
to sale, the auctioneer could have honestly 
laid stress on the singular completeness of 
the estate. It was in perfect order. The 
• family ' reaped that advantage. </p>

<p>A breathless hatred of Robert Godwin 
prevailed from north to south, east to west, 
of that broad stretch of land. From the 
tenant of a thousand acres, and the wealthy 
tradesman (like Rosa's father) down to the 
miserable old woman in her shanty, living on 
tea and soaked bread, the hatred of Robert 
Godwin was universal. </p>



</p>

 </p>

<p>The well-to-do exhibited this feeling by- 
asking him to every entertainment they gave 
— invitations seldom accepted, for Godwin 
was a solitary man — by publicly praising him 
at every meeting, by treating him with the 
greatest respect, and by holding their tongues 
in private. No one ever abused Robert 
Godwin. </p>

<p>Even the old women did not curse him, as 
they do in story-books, for they have come 
to learn — these old women — in the nine- 
teenth century that curses are as harmless as 
thistledown. They looked after him as he 
passed — ^simply folded their arms and looked 
after him. </p>

<p>His mind, hard set upon the subject in 
hand, was clear and practical, consequently 
upon agricultural topics, and such as came 
within his reach, Godwin could make a 
good speech. He frequently spoke, express- 
ing himself in plain and forcible language; 
his speeches appeared in full in the local 

</p>



<p>prints, and were even transferred to the 
London agricultural papers. He possessed 
a considerable reputation of this kind, and 
justly so, for he spoke out of the fulness of 
practical knowledge. 



</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
