<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-2" id="chapter-2-8" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">VIII</h2>
			<p>ORNLEIGH CORNLEIGH sat sideways in his armchair, facing a little towards the window, and apparently listened with the deepest attention to the details of the prosecution. His whole mind seemed to be concentrated upon the business before him.</p>
			<p>His youthful face was rather prepossess- incr; he was a blonde man, and his features had an expression of ingenuousness, such as is proper to youth. The countenance of eighteen had been carried on through the years, and remained set on the shoulders of the man of fifty. The face had not grown with time.</p>
			<p>His light hair was parted at the side, and brushed back precisely as his fond mother had parted it and brushed it back in his school-days. It had never obtained a dis- tinctive set and character. Nor was there the least trace of beard or moustache.</p>
			<p>A line — one single thin line — ran up his forehead, and remained there always, the groove of effort, of mental labour. A little mind has to work harder than a great one, and such work leaves traces behind it. His chin was the best part, being well cut, and somewhat indicative of will, an indication it so far fulfilled that although he was the worst hand at speechmaking in the world, he never shrank from the task, and it was whispered that even Letitia had discovered he could not be driven beyond a certain point.</p>
			<p>A habit of always looking downwards, as if listening to a sermon, concealed very good blue eyes, which, half-closed in this way, were conspicuously fringed with whitish eyelashes.</p>
			<p>You saw nothing but the eyelids and the whitish eyelashes.</p>
			<p>It was his way to sit sideways in this manner, his hands folded, ingenuously look- ing downwards, in a state of the profoundest attention — or of the most perfect indiffer- ence.</p>
			<p>Not a trace of his fifty years appeared in his countenance or hair; he looked not a day over thirty. His dress was faultless, marked with a red-silk handkerchief, the corner of which always projected from the breast- pocket. Only long practice and great skill could have so folded the inevitable red-silk handkerchief, that precisely the same extent of its edge should invariably be visible. In this particular, as in ' The Sporting Calendar," the Squire was very exact.</p>
			<p>Nothing in his attitude betrayed the slightest interest in the entry of Felise, although such a person was seldom indeed to be seen in the justice-room. No curiosity was shown by casual glances in her direc-</p>
			<p>tion; it might have been a matter of con- jecture if he had or had not seen her come in. The fringe of whitish eyelashes was not raised — not the faintest sparkle of in- quiry could be traced in the expression of his face.</p>
			<p>Yet they were a singular and unique pair, these two sitting upon the hard wooden form, side by side in the justice-room, at the rear of constables, and ill-savoured rogues and vagabonds standing up for sentence.</p>
			<p>Clad in the simplest and plainest of black dresses, Felise's exceptional loveliness only shone the purer.</p>
			<p>His two sticks in one withered hand, his chin not far from his knees, his shrunken cheeks the hue of clay, colourless for lack of blood — of beefsteaks and ale — the patriarch swung his body to and fro, muttering to him- self, ' I knowed yer grandfather."</p>
			<p>The magistrate's clerk, who also sat at the table, was quite alive to the contrast, and frequently glanced towards the form;</p>
			<p>so did the sergeant of police present, and even the rogue and vagabond in the cor- ner just sentenced to fourteen days for beg- ofinof.</p>
			<p>But whether Cornleigh Cornleigh saw FeHse or not, it was impossible to deter- mine. The man was inscrutable.</p>
			<p>People for years past had asked them- selves similar questions about Cornleigh; if he saw, or did not see? whether he saw and kept things to himself, or whether his mind was a blank? He seemed to be listening intently, to be pondering profoundly, but nothinof ever came of it.</p>
			<p>The gamekeeper, who knew him best, used to puzzle in his cups over the point, and told many anecdotes illustrating the subject. When out alone with the Squire shooting, he had seen a hare run right between Cornleigh's legs, and Corn- leigh never so much as took his gun from under his arm. The hare ran by and escaped. ' For, of course, I couldn't fire till he did," said the keeper; ' I couldn't take the game out of his mouth. But he never lifted his gun."</p>
			<p>Another time the Squire did put up his gun and aim at a partridge, or at least point it at a covey; and after a minute or two, during which the birds flew out of range, he took it down again without pulling the trigger. On the other hand, when there was a party of sportsmen out with him, the Squire shot better than any of them, and was noted as a marksman.</p>
			<p>"Nobody can't make him out," said the keeper. ' But let folk say what they likes agen him, there's one thing as / can say. He have never give me nothing — he bean't free- handed loike some gcnnelmen — but he never don't find no fault. He comes and looks at the chicks or at the puppies, but he never finds no fault. He don't nag. I have been with him nineteen year, and he have never said a word to I."</p>
			<p>This, however, did not decide the question as to whether the Squire did or did not see things.</p>
			<p>* But you look here," went on the keeper, growing- warm over his ale. ' 'TIs very well knowed as he takes after his grandfather in his face — well, now you look here. His grandfather, as folk says, knowed all the pretty wenches for ten mile round, and knowed a deuced sight too much about 'em. But this yer one never looks at no girls."</p>
			<p>Inscrutability was the Squire's chief cha- racteristic.</p>
			<p>Ingenuous and docile, he had always done as he was bid. He obeyed his mother with- out question; he married Letitia because the sagacious old lady bade him. Since then he had obeyed Letitia.</p>
			<p>He did as he was bid by his steward, Robert Godwin. He did as he was bid by his solicitor, who prompted him at public meetings. By virtue of his position, he sat as chairman at the Petty Sessions, and pro-</p>
			<p>nounced the sentences whispered to him by his rio-ht-hand man. He did as he was bid by the party- whip in Parliament.</p>
			<p>"Just the thing for Cornleigh! Capital thing for Cornleigh! Just the wife for Corn- leigh!" they said when it was seen how she was leading him in the correct path; how the waste lands were claimed; the lanes diverted; the estate enclosed in a rigid ring- fence; the town straitened — all for the profit of the property. ' Most energetic woman, and just the wife for Cornleigh!"</p>
			<p>There were ladies in the town who, in strict privacy, could not endure Letitia. * So masterful you know, dear;" because, in short, she was the grey mare. Every woman likes her own way, but no woman can endure to see another woman master even over a man who does not concern her. They hated the grey mare, and very carefully copied the dresses she wore.</p>
			<p>Hard sentences were frequently pronounced at the Petty Sessions where Cornleigh sat as chairman — justice's justice — it was not peculiar to Maasbury. Cornleigh delivered them sitting sideways with folded hands, looking downwards, and every now and then raising the whitish fringe of his eyelids and jerking his words out, to again relapse into the downward gaze. Not the slightest sym- pathy, pity, or interest ever appeared in his face or in the tones of his voice. With right and equity he had nothing to do; he simply said what was put into his mouth.</p>
			<p>Some of the old folk in the town, well- to-do folk who remembered his handsome grandfather — said to have disputed the first place for nobility of appearance with Byron — felt a sneaking kindness for the Squire in spite of the straitened town, in spite of his absolute lack of interest in the place which belonged to him, and the innumerable petty acts of oppression perpetrated under his authority.</p>
			<p>There was not one of these old families that had not at different times rendered services to the House of Cornleigh. They would have been amply satisfied with recog- nition in the streets, with a nod, a wave of the hand; they fancied they were entitled to this. They did not receive it.</p>
			<p>Cornleigh never saw them; he passed them just as he passed the pillar-box; he would look them right in the face without knowing it. Yet if he was spoken to he would answer affably, and even offer a cigar, and the next day go by the same individual without turninof his head.</p>
			<p>As for Letitia, she trampled on them in contemptuous indifference. ' Such a capital thing for Cornleigh! Just the wife for Corn- leigh!" Now in course of time it usually happens that great houses, even houses like the House of Cornleigh, come to need friends: Letitia's was hardly the way to secure them.</p>
			<p>But there are people in this servile world who will endure any trampling, and at the first beck rush delightedly to proffer their assistance. Perhaps Letitia understood this. These old folk — in order to disQfuise their inborn servility from themselves — used to say that after all it was not Cornleigh; he was all right; he did not do these things, only his agents, and of course a gentleman could not be expected to know everything his groom was about. If only Cornleigh Cornleigh could be got at he would be a very good fellow indeed.</p>
			<p>The Squire was inimitable in doing nothing. He pottered about in a way not easily described, because to describe you must mention something, and Cornleigh did nothing to mention. If he took up the newspaper he did not read it; in fact, he never read anything. He sat about, and presently strolled down to the estate-office; then came out and stood in the doorway, and lit his cigar and looked up and down the street, seeing no one.</p>
			<p>His cigar was always an especially good one — Cornleigh was exact in his cigars as in his ' Sporting Calendar;" it was a common remark in the hotel bars, ' This cigar is equal to Cornleigh's!"</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
