<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="volume-2" id="chapter-2-13" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XIII</h2>
			<p>Felise was thinking: “How well he talks⁠—what ideas he has! his voice is low, but it is deep and strong; his lips are well-shaped⁠—I should like a kiss. That is a shabby old coat; yes, your coat is much worn, sir, but it suits you; you look a gentleman all the more, perhaps. How I should like to give you a new one! Who gave you that gold pin in your tie, I wonder⁠—some woman? His ears are good; most men have ill-formed ears. His hair is very fine, like silk. I wonder what he is thinking of⁠—me⁠—is he thinking of me at all? There is a small mole on his neck. Why doesn’t he look at me⁠—he has such fine eyes? Your hands are not small, sir, nor are they white. I do not hke white hands; they look as if they could not do anything. Your hands are a little sun-browned, and they are not small and feeble; I think you could give anyone a hard knock, though you are not very big. Why don’t you look at me? Look at me straight in the face, now do, there’s a dear! I hope he is trustful, but why does he look away?⁠—he looks anywhere rather than at me. Yes, you have a very good neck⁠—that makes your head appear so good. Why do you want to hide your eyes? I wish my hair was just the same shade as his; how nice it must be to have hair that colour! His boots have been mended. Ah! it is hard times with him⁠—wish I was sharing them! His handkerchief wants darning. How glad I am I gave him his horse again! How angry papa will be when he finds out what I did! He <em>is</em> handsome⁠—I wonder how many girls have flattered him! I dare say he is quite spoilt. Will he ever like me? He will not look at me; I will contradict him presently, then perhaps he will.”</p>
			<p>Martial was thinking: “How fortunate I exhausted all my romance before I met her! There is no knowing to what lengths I should have gone; but luckily all those extravagances are gone by. These are very common old Windsor chairs. I don’t believe our miserly steward has a respectable chair in his dog-kennel, <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">i.e.</abbr> his house⁠—wretched hard old chairs; but how gracefully she rests herself in hers! Her body seems to poise on itself and repose without the chair, as if the chair was merely put there to content the eye of the spectator; she rests like an Immortal on the ether. Really she does do things nicely⁠—to see her walk, it is a picture. I think she sighs now and then. I believe she breathed more deeply just then; of course she does that because it makes her bust swell and fall more. Oh yes, the cunning of these women is something beyond the power of man to circumvent. Breathe as deeply as you like, it is no use. I am case-hardened. I have been through all these experiences⁠—old birds and chaff, you have heard. Very beautiful no doubt, but still a woman. Very interesting indeed. I know more than you think. What a lovely shoulder she has beneath that dress⁠—I shall never forget it. You don’t know what a view I had when you were bathing. And her hair reaches down to her knee, very nearly; thick, too, wavy and fine. But that is nothing to her shape and her knee⁠—there, she has just moved her knee. I can see it quite plainly through the dress as I saw it then, white and dewy from the water. She makes believe to listen to everything I say⁠—just as if she cared, just as if she liked what I say about things. What a stupid I am to talk to her of anything beside a bonnet! I can feel she keeps looking at me; very likely she wants to try another glance on me⁠—long and passionate. No, no, nothing of the kind; I won’t permit you. I will keep my eyes on the grass or the trees as firm as possible. In the sonnets there is a line⁠—pooh! I will not remember such folly. I wish she would move a little farther away. I can feel her sitting near me. I don’t like this⁠—when’s Godwin coming? I must get out of it. Her shoulder and her neck, and her white knee⁠—her dress is quite transparent to me. I never could have thought there was anyone so lovely in the world. Now her hand⁠—there it is drooping; it is not only white, it is lit up within with some delicious light⁠—some clearness, as if it was the dawn under the skin. There, she has raised her hand; she rests her head against it a moment. Now see, it is not transparent like that of anyone very ill; it is plump, but it is alight, aglow⁠—the dawn is inside it. She is Greek, and yet she is not; she is English-Greek; the mingling of the styles of the antique and the English produces the greatest beauty. She feels delicious to sit by; something seems to influence me; it is extraordinarily pleasant sitting by her. There is something dreamy in it, as if she were Cytherea. Here, what am I at! Romancing. She’s only a woman. However, I need not worry myself about occasional lapses. I am hardened enough, in all conscience. This sort of creature is very well as a Picture; you don’t want to get excited over it. She looked straight at me then. No, I am not going to look at you⁠—much too cold for that. Must say something, I suppose. Now I have sat by her once, I could do so every day without the least dano-er. There, the sunlight has touched her hair⁠—”</p>
			<p>Aloud he said: “The sun is still very warm, although sinking.”</p>
			<p>“The warm weather is welcome to you, I suppose; it is good for your wheat, is it not?” she replied.</p>
			<p>“Yes, it is; still it is not much use. It is too late⁠—or seems so. Any weather is good enough for a despised farmer.”</p>
			<p>“I do not see why they should be despised.”</p>
			<p>“I am weary of it,” said Martial, suddenly throwing off his air of studied indifference. “We go on⁠—at least I do⁠—from hand to mouth, year after year; it is a most unpleasant position. We are permitted to exist⁠—on charity. As a great favour, out of his gracious benevolence our landlord presents us with ten percent. — as a present, not as our right. I think I shall get out of it. I am very much inclined to sell off and go to the States⁠—”</p>
			<p>“The States!” repeated Felise in a low voice, shocked and alarmed.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I think so. This system of touch-the-hat is too much for me. Certainly the farmers are very much to blame; it is perfectly sickening to see their servility, all praising and be-lauding and applauding the very men they hate. There is nothing sturdy or independent about the British farmer of our day⁠—truckling to the landlord, and truckling to the steward, and truckling to the solicitor, and truckling to the parson; it is most contemptible. If they had had the courage to say what they thought, and if they had had the common sense to combine together, they could have done whatever they chose. But as for combination, they are incapable of it. Now it is too late.</p>
			<p>“Why too late?”</p>
			<p>“The labourers⁠—your old cottager, for instance⁠—are going to have votes, and in future the country, I mean the rural districts, will be in their hands. The farmers as a governing class will disappear.”</p>
			<p>“Then old Abner will be able to stay in his cottage,” said Felise, naturally jumping to a conclusion.</p>
			<p>“Events will not move quick enough to serve him, I fear,” said Martial. “His wrong is but one among so many. What rouses my indignation is the complacent assertion that there is really nothing wrong. So much philanthropy, and so many reforms in workhouses and prisons, and in the laws, they say, have removed everything cruel and harsh, while I believe it is just the reverse; I beHeve there is just as much cruelty and harshness in the workhouses and prisons and infirmaries⁠—in the whole system⁠—as ever there was. Really, I do think that the more philanthropy is talked about, and especially scientific philanthropy, the more individual suffering there is. It is all so vague. They give thousands to hospitals⁠—not a penny to a poor man. Cornleigh Cornleigh would subscribe a hundred pounds to a new hospital, but he would not permit your aged cottager to stay in his home⁠—nothing of the sort; drive him to the workhouse. There is nothing so cold-hearted as philanthropy.”</p>
			<p>“You mean it is all given to the buildings, and not to the sufferers.”</p>
			<p>“That is it; but I am afraid the sun is too warm for you.” The sunset-glow now came full upon Felise’s face.</p>
			<p>“No, not at all. Besides, I have my sunshade.”</p>
			<p>She had her sunshade, indeed, and had thrown it carelessly over her shoulder, so that if the sun had been shining at her back it would have protected her; but the rays came from the right hand⁠—across Martial⁠—so that the parasol was useless in the position she had it. If she had shaded herself from the sun she could not have seen him, as the parasol would intervene⁠—that was the reason of her apparent carelessness.</p>
			<p>The door of the house creaked, and Robert Godwin came out; they rose and met him. He said that he should not require Martial’s services further that evening⁠—would he come the day after next? Martial agreed, and went to fetch Ruy from the stable. Both of them accompanied Felise some way towards her home, then wished her “goodevening,” and parted.</p>
			<p>The same scene occurred on the next oc-</p>
			<p>asion of Barnard’s visit to Godwin; Martial and Felise sat in the scanty shade of the poplars on the white-green lawn, thinking of one thing, and talking of another.</p>
			<p>I That the altered position of their affairs might be thrown into relief, it seemed best to delineate the circumstances first before explaining them; just as actors come on the stage and begin to tell their story afterwards. Robert Godwin had contrived this, and every other evening Felise and Martial, in the shade of the tall poplar, sat on his lawn, idle, side by side, till the glow of the sunset touched her cheek.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
