<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVIII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-18" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title ordinal z3998:roman">XVIII</h2> 



■|NTERING the garden by a side- 
path, Felise heard two voices in 
^^ loud altercation, or rather one 
voice stridently asserting itself over the other, 
and she paused where she could see the 
disputants through the open window. </p>

<p>Goring in the whitest of white shirt-sleeves 
— ^just as he had left his spade — was standing 
by the mantelpiece, resting his firm chin on 
his hand, and steadfasdy regarding the 
steward. His high forehead, pardy bald, 
and flecked at the temples with grey among 
the brown of his hair, expressed calm intellect 
reposing in itself. Not the nervous, eager 
brain which seeks preferment and must thrust 

</p>



<p>Itself to the front; the intellect which reposes 
and reflects. </p>

<p>There was almost too much mind for 
action behind that noble forehead; it was the 
thinker, not the doer. The clear, steel-blue 
eyes under their thick eyebrows, the set 
mouth and the firm chin, at the same time 
indicated an immovable will; a man who 
would have his way without the least outward 
noise or ostentation. His strong frame — a 
trifle bowed, as those of men usually are who 
work with their hands for pleasure or profit 
— and great breadth were fully exposed by his 
negligent costume; his brawny throat, indeed, 
was visible. 

' If only papa would work among men 
instead of among trees, what a leader he 
would be !' thought Felise. </p>

<p>Mr. Godwin, with his hat on (not an in- 
tentional rudeness), stood by the table on 
which he struck his fist, clad in dark brown 
and wearing gaiters. He was of full average 
height, stout, and strongly built; he appeared 

</p>

<p>capable of exKgooiaL ^^i'JTrrr^ ri-^ nsi 
on the tabie "irss irmFx i:£ l piei^ of oak 
that h^^' besE e2:x35e£ iZ rbe 'R^t.er to the 
action of iiie -wsaciKr. His fii:?r was neither 
ruddy, hroin^ nvc vjarJjL. bjt a mixture of 
the three; i vs rjidfr fron a fulness of 
blood; 31 ursi itittj fr::c: T'-:nd and rain : it 
was Kaci fr:m: sir. H^ face might have 
been est it iiruize, 50 reniarkable was the 
appeaisnax: rf !i5crfib>>d. </p>

<p>His fescira -w^r' r^alar, and, except that 
the deeij w^rt somewhat too full, might 
even tare Etta safd to be handsome, but 
they were asc m a set expression; his 
mouth — t&fe worst feature, being without 
cun-e— did niut smile; his brow had a lino 
constantly tiiere. This fixidity, and the ex- 
tremely weather-beaten hue of his complexion, 
seemed to announce a concentration of cha- 
racter that made most people shrink fVoni 
him. Mr. Goring was brown from the sun. 
yet beside Godwin he looked fair. </p>

<p>Godwin's voice was loud; he hurled ^'''' 

</p>



<p>words and shut his lips tight immediately; 
but his language was correct, for he was well 
educated. Possibly his exceptionally hardy 
nature had something to do with his pitiless 
character. A man with thousands in his 
pocket, but who was content with a coarse 
fare of bread and bacon, or even bread and 
cheese, was not likely to feel much senti- 
mental sympathy for weaker beings. </p>

<p>His family had all been alike; 'hard as 
crab-apples ' was the saying of the country- 
side. </p>

<p>Every tenant upon the estate spoke in 
the highest terms of Mr. Godwin to his 
neighbour. At the public dinners Mr. God- 
win was mentioned with the deepest respect. 
' A shrewd, first-rate man, Godwin; knows 
his business; a good fellow, too, at bottom.' 
Alone, in private, there was not a man who 
did not hate him; but not a man would 
have dared to admit as much even to his 
wife. </p>

<p>In Mr. Goring's calm glance there was 

</p>



<p>perhaps some little admixture of amused 
disdain. Godwin glared with his colourless 
grey eyes, the angrier because he could not 
impress the person he was attacking. 

' You cannot show a scrap of paper/ Felise 
heard Godwin saying. ' Tm certain there is 
no such deed. You have no more right to 
fish than you have to give that rascally 
labourer of yours more money than anyone 
else.' 

' I believe/ said Mr. Goring, 'that the law 
permits me to pay what wages I please/ 

' It does not permit you to trespass and to 
leave gates open, so that cattle stray and do 
damage. You'll have to pay for it, Goring — 
mark my words! What right has she to 
trample down the grass and do every species 
of mischief .-^ Even if you do possess, or 
claim to possess a right to fish, it does not 
extend to her.' 

' Was it me, then ?' asked Felise suddenly, 
coming to the window. 

' You are the culprit/ laughed her uncle. 

</p>

<p>I90 THE DEWY MORN. 

' Why, you have the rod in your hand — 
you're caught/ </p>

<p>Godwin looked at her, and instinctively 
removed his hat. He growled something in 
his throat. He did not speak, but he had 
the grace to be silent. 

' You are accused of poaching, trespassing, 
and doing every species of mischief,' said 
Mr. Goring. ' Come in and defend your- 
self.' </p>

<p>Felise smiled, and went round the hoiise 
to the front door; but on turning the corner 
started, became pale, flushed again, and then 
stepped quickly towards a horse Abner had 
care of. It was Ruy — Martial's horse. </p>

<p>Was /^e here, then ? </p>

<p>She stroked Ruy's neck, looked in'side the 
hall, returned, stroked him again; in her 
agitation she scarce knew what to do, or say, 
or think. 

' Is Mr. Barnard here ?' she said at last. 

' No, miss,' replied Abner. 
' But— but ' 

</p>

 191 

' Mr. Godwin came on him/ said the 
man. </p>

<p>Godwin riding Martial's favourite — how 
was this ? Felise instantly felt that there 
was something wrong, and Godwin's dark 
face appearing at that moment in the hall 
seemed sinister to her. His pale grey eyes 
— colourless like water — shone in the shadow 
of the doorway. She could not ask him any 
questions, but she did not withdraw her hand 
from Ruy's neck. The horse rubbed his 
face against her shoulder. 

' I've just bought him,' said Godwin, soften- 
ing his voice as much as he could. ' Do you 
like him ?' 

' Yes.' </p>

<p>He began to gather the bridle in his hand, 
taking it from Abner. Godwin was so near 
her that her dress touched him. She felt his 
direct glance beating upon her, as the hard 
sun beats on an exposed rock. There was 
no cessation in his glance. </p>

<p>She remembered the remark of the 

</p>

 

</p>

<p>cottager that Barnard was not rich, that 
young blood spent money. Could it be that 
Martial was in difficulty ? How else came 
he to part with his horse ? Her heart 
quailed; quick sympathy confused her. She 
did not move aside that Godwin might mount, 
but stood by Ruy. </p>

<p>Godwin s colourless eyes were bent un- 
swervingly upon her face; he had the bridle 
in his hand, but he was in no haste. </p>

<p>In her agitation Felise did nothing but 
stroke Ruy, who was growing impatient for 
his manger — so affection is wasted upon 
those whose sole thought is provender. 

' I am afraid I gave too much for him,' 
said Godwin. </p>

<p>Mr. Goring smiled; the idea of Godwin 
giving too much for anything was good. </p>

<p>Felise was running over in her mind 
everything she could think of that would 
be likely to draw out the truth, yet without 
betraying her interest in Barnard. 

^ Have you had him long ?' she asked. 

</p>

 193 

' No, only a week or two/ 

' From whom did you buy him ?' — as if she 
did not know. 

' Barnard of Manor House/ 

' Did you give much ?' 

' Seventy pounds.' 

' Why did he want to sell ?' 

' Wanted the money; but I dare say 
there's something wrong with the horse. I 
shan't find it out for a month or two — 
Barnard's too sharp for me.' </p>

<p>Mr. Goring, in the porch, smiled sarcas- 
tically. If Godwin gave a man the character 
of sharpness, it went without asking that he 
was anything but shrewd at such matters as 
a horse-deal. </p>

<p>Still stroking Ruy — her dress rustling 
against Godwin, Felise for the second time; 
delayed the impatient horse; just as she had 
on the hills one morning. 

' Mr. Godwin wants to mount/ said Goring 
at last. 

' I forgot,' said Felise, and moved away; 
VOL. I. 13 

</p>

 </p>

<p>the steward, however, did not seem in any- 
great hurry. He got up leisurely enough, 
but reined Ruy with so powerful a hand that 
the horse stood quiet, and Felise touched his 
neck once more. 

'Will you come over and see us?' said 
Godwin. ' My sister would be very pleased 
if you would; the meadows are dry now, and 
the path easy.' 

' I will come,' said Felise, to her uncle's 
astonishment. 

' Soon r 

■ To-morrow morning.' </p>

<p>Then she looked up at Godwin's cast- 
bronze face, and asked in the most matter-of- 
fact tone she could assume : 

' Why did Barnard sell — why did he want 
money ?' 

' Because he's a fool,' said Godwin rudely. 
She flushed — he thought it was because of 
his rudeness. 

' Beg pardon,' he said. ' You will be sure 
to come to-morrow morning Y 

</p>

 195 

' I will; </p>

<p>Still Godwin lingered, Ruy fidgeted; 
Goring wished to go to his garden-work, 
but Godwin did not start. A moment 
passed without a word being spoken, when 
Felise slightly bowed and went in; Godwin 
immediately rode off without a word. 

'Are you really going to visit them.'^' 
asked Mr. Goring. 

' Yes, papa; unless you object.' 

' No, I don't object — still, you know the 
man's character.' 

' That he is a tyrant, yes; but I am going 
to see Ruy.' 

'Ruy?' 

' Oh, I mean the horse. I heard his name 
just now. He is a beautiful horse, isn't 
he?' 

</p>




</p>

		</section>
	</body>
</html>
